The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chitra, a Play in One Act
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chitra, a Play in One Act

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: February 1, 2001 [eBook #2502]
                Most recently updated: December 11, 2008

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Elliot S. Wheeler, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHITRA, A PLAY IN ONE ACT ***




Produced by Elliot S. Wheeler





                             CHITRA

                               BY

                       RABINDRANATH TAGORE


                        A PLAY IN ONE ACT




                            New York
                      THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                              1926

                   All rights reserved




                         Copyright 1914

                    by THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

        Set up and electrotyped  Published February, 1914
        Reprinted March, twice, June, 1914; October, 1914;
        February, June, 1915; March, October, 1916; March, 1917;
        December, 1926.

           PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY

                     THE BERWICK & SMITH CO.






                               TO

                    MRS. WILLIAM VAUGHN MOODY



                             PREFACE

THIS lyrical drama was written about twenty-five years ago. It is based
on the following story from the Mahabharata.

In the course of his wanderings, in fulfilment of a vow of penance,
Arjuna came to Manipur.  There he saw Chitrangada, the beautiful
daughter of Chitravahana, the king of the country. Smitten with her
charms, he asked the king for the hand of his daughter in marriage.
Chitravahana asked him who he was, and learning that he was Arjuna the
Pandara, told him that Prabhanjana, one of his ancestors in the kingly
line of Manipur, had long been childless.  In order to obtain an heir,
he performed severe penances.  Pleased with these austerities, the god
Shiva gave him this boon, that he and his successors should each have
one child.  It so happened that the promised child had invariably been a
son.  He, Chitravahana, was the first to have only a daughter
Chitrangada to perpetuate the race.  He had, therefore, always treated
her as a son and had made her his heir.

Continuing, the king said:

"The one son that will be born to her must be the perpetuator of my
race.  That son will be the price that I shall demand for this marriage.
You can take her, if you like, on this condition."

Arjuna promised and took Chitrangada to wife, and lived in her father's
capital for three years.  When a son was born to them, he embraced her
with affection, and taking leave of her and her father, set out again on
his travels.




CHITRA




THE CHARACTERS

  GODS:
     MADANA (Eros).
     VASANTA (Lycoris).

  MORTALS:
     CHITRA, daughter of the King of Manipur.
     ARJUNA, a prince of the house of the Kurus.  He is of the
  Kshatriya or "warrior caste," and during the action is living as
  a Hermit retired in the forest.

  VILLAGERS from an outlying district of Manipur.

  NOTE.--The dramatic poem "Chitra" has been performed in India
  without scenery--the actors being surrounded by the audience.
  Proposals for its production here having been made to him, he
  went through this translation and provided stage directions, but
  wished these omitted if it were printed as a book.




SCENE I


                               Chitra

     ART thou the god with the five darts, the Lord of Love?


                               Madana

     I am he who was the first born in the heart of the Creator.  I
     bind in bonds of pain and bliss the lives of men and women!


                               Chitra

     I know, I know what that pain is and those bonds.--And who art
     thou, my lord?


                              Vasanta

     I am his friend--Vasanta--the King of the Seasons.  Death and
     decrepitude would wear the world to the bone but that I follow
     them and constantly attack them.  I am Eternal Youth.


                               Chitra

     I bow to thee, Lord Vasanta.


                               Madana

     But what stern vow is thine, fair stranger?  Why dost thou wither
     thy fresh youth with penance and mortification?  Such a sacrifice
     is not fit for the worship of love.  Who art thou and what is thy
     prayer?


                               Chitra

     I am Chitra, the daughter of the kingly house of Manipur.  With
     godlike grace Lord Shiva promised to my royal grandsire an
     unbroken line of male descent.  Nevertheless, the divine word
     proved powerless to change the spark of life in my mother's womb
     --so invincible was my nature, woman though I be.


                               Madana

     I know, that is why thy father brings thee up as his son.  He has
     taught thee the use of the bow and all the duties of a king.


                               Chitra

     Yes, that is why I am dressed in man's attire and have left the
     seclusion of a woman's chamber.  I know no feminine wiles for
     winning hearts.  My hands are strong to bend the bow, but I have
     never learnt Cupid's archery, the play of eyes.


                               Madana

     That requires no schooling, fair one.  The eye does its work
     untaught, and he knows how well, who is struck in the heart.


                               Chitra

     One day in search of game I roved alone to the forest on the bank
     of the Purna river.  Tying my horse to a tree trunk I entered a
     dense thicket on the track of a deer.  I found a narrow sinuous
     path meandering through the dusk of the entangled boughs, the
     foliage vibrated with the chirping of crickets, when of a sudden
     I came upon a man lying on a bed of dried leaves, across my path.
     I asked him haughtily to move aside, but he heeded not.  Then
     with the sharp end of my bow I pricked him in contempt.
     Instantly he leapt up with straight, tall limbs, like a sudden
     tongue of fire from a heap of ashes.  An amused smile flickered
     round the corners of his mouth, perhaps at the sight of my boyish
     countenance.  Then for the first time in my life I felt myself a
     woman, and knew that a man was before me.


                               Madana

     At the auspicious hour I teach the man and the woman this supreme
     lesson to know themselves.  What happened after that?


                               Chitra

     With fear and wonder I asked him "Who are you?" "I am Arjuna," he
     said, "of the great Kuru clan."  I stood petrified like a statue,
     and forgot to do him obeisance.  Was this indeed Arjuna, the one
     great idol of my dreams!  Yes, I had long ago heard how he had
     vowed a twelve-years' celibacy.  Many a day my young ambition had
     spurred me on to break my lance with him, to challenge him in
     disguise to single combat, and prove my skill in arms against
     him.  Ah, foolish heart, whither fled thy presumption?  Could I
     but exchange my youth with all its aspirations for the clod of
     earth under his feet, I should deem it a most precious grace.  I
     know not in what whirlpool of thought I was lost, when suddenly I
     saw him vanish through the trees.  O foolish woman, neither didst
     thou greet him, nor speak a word, nor beg forgiveness, but
     stoodest like a barbarian boor while he contemptuously walked
     away! . . . Next morning I laid aside my man's clothing.  I
     donned bracelets, anklets, waist-chain, and a gown of purple red
     silk. The unaccustomed dress clung about my shrinking shame; but
     I hastened on my quest, and found Arjuna in the forest temple of
     Shiva.


                               Madana

     Tell me the story to the end.  I am the heart-born god, and I
     understand the mystery of these impulses.


                               Chitra

     Only vaguely can I remember what things I said, and what answer I
     got.  Do not ask me to tell you all.  Shame fell on me like a
     thunderbolt, yet could not break me to pieces, so utterly hard,
     so like a man am I.  His last words as I walked home pricked my
     ears like red hot needles.  "I have taken the vow of celibacy.  I
     am not fit to be thy husband!"  Oh, the vow of a man!  Surely
     thou knowest, thou god of love, that unnumbered saints and sages
     have surrendered the merits of their life-long penance at the
     feet of a woman.  I broke my bow in two and burnt my arrows in
     the fire. I hated my strong, lithe arm, scored by drawing the
     bowstring.  O Love, god Love, thou hast laid low in the dust the
     vain pride of my manlike strength; and all my man's training lies
     crushed under thy feet.  Now teach me thy lessons; give me the
     power of the weak and the weapon of the unarmed hand.


                               Madana

     I will be thy friend.  I will bring the world-conquering Arjuna a
     captive before thee, to accept his rebellion's sentence at thy
     hand.


                               Chitra

     Had I but the time needed, I could win his heart by slow degrees,
     and ask no help of the gods.  I would stand by his side as a
     comrade, drive the fierce horses of his war-chariot, attend him
     in the pleasures of the chase, keep guard at night at the
     entrance of his tent, and help him in all the great duties of a
     Kshatriya, rescuing the weak, and meting out justice where it is
     due.  Surely at last the day would have come for him to look at
     me and wonder, "What boy is this?  Has one of my slaves in a
     former life followed me like my good deeds into this?"  I am not
     the woman who nourishes her despair in lonely silence, feeding it
     with nightly tears and covering it with the daily patient smile,
     a widow from her birth.  The flower of my desire shall never drop
     into the dust before it has ripened to fruit.  But it is the
     labour of a life time to make one's true self known and honoured.
     Therefore I have come to thy door, thou world-vanquishing Love,
     and thou, Vasanta, youthful Lord of the Seasons, take from
     my young body this primal injustice, an unattractive plainness.
     For a single day make me superbly beautiful, even as beautiful as
     was the sudden blooming of love in my heart.  Give me but one
     brief day of perfect beauty, and I will answer for the days that
     follow.


                               Madana

     Lady, I grant thy prayer.


                              Vasanta

     Not for the short span of a day, but for one whole year the charm
     of spring blossoms shall nestle round thy limbs.




SCENE II

                               Arjuna

     WAS I dreaming or was what I saw by the lake truly there?
     Sitting on the mossy turf, I mused over bygone years in the
     sloping shadows of the evening, when slowly there came out from
     the folding darkness of foliage an apparition of beauty in the
     perfect form of a woman, and stood on a white slab of stone at
     the water's brink.  It seemed that the heart of the earth must
     heave in joy under her bare white feet.  Methought the vague
     veilings of her body should melt in ecstasy into air as the
     golden mist of dawn melts from off the snowy peak of the eastern
     hill.  She bowed herself above the shining mirror of the lake and
     saw the reflection of her face.  She started up in awe and stood
     still; then smiled, and with a careless sweep of her left arm
     unloosed her hair and let it trail on the earth at her feet.  She
     bared her bosom and looked at her arms, so flawlessly modelled,
     and instinct with an exquisite caress.  Bending her head she
     saw the sweet blossoming of her youth and the tender bloom and
     blush of her skin.  She beamed with a glad surprise.  So, if the
     white lotus bud on opening her eyes in the morning were to arch
     her neck and see her shadow in the water, would she wonder at
     herself the livelong day.  But a moment after the smile passed
     from her face and a shade of sadness crept into her eyes.  She
     bound up her tresses, drew her veil over her arms, and sighing
     slowly, walked away like a beauteous evening fading into the
     night.  To me the supreme fulfilment of desire seemed to have
     been revealed in a flash and then to have vanished. . . . But who
     is it that pushes the door?


              Enter CHITRA, dressed as a woman.

     Ah!  it is she.  Quiet, my heart! . . . Fear me not, lady!  I am
     a Kshatriya.


                               Chitra

     Honoured sir, you are my guest.  I live in this temple.  I know
     not in what way I can show you hospitality.


                               Arjuna

     Fair lady, the very sight of you is indeed the highest
     hospitality.  If you will not take it amiss I would ask you a
     question.


                               Chitra

     You have permission.


                               Arjuna

     What stern vow keeps you immured in this solitary temple,
     depriving all mortals of a vision of so much loveliness?


                               Chitra

     I harbour a secret desire in my heart, for the fulfilment of
     which I offer daily prayers to Lord Shiva.


                               Arjuna

     Alas, what can you desire, you who are the desire of the whole
     world!  From the easternmost hill on whose summit the morning sun
     first prints his fiery foot to the end of the sunset land have I
     travelled.  I have seen whatever is most precious, beautiful and
     great on the earth.  My knowledge shall be yours, only say for
     what or for whom you seek.


                               Chitra

     He whom I seek is known to all.

                               Arjuna

     Indeed!  Who may this favourite of the gods be, whose fame has
     captured your heart?

                               Chitra

     Sprung from the highest of all royal houses, the greatest of all
     heroes is he.


                               Arjuna

     Lady, offer not such wealth of beauty as is yours on the altar of
     false reputation.  Spurious fame spreads from tongue to tongue
     like the fog of the early dawn before the sun rises.  Tell me who
     in the highest of kingly lines is the supreme hero?


                               Chitra

     Hermit, you are jealous of other men's fame.  Do you not know
     that all over the world the royal house of the Kurus is the most
     famous?


                               Arjuna

     The house of the Kurus!


                               Chitra

     And have you never heard of the greatest name of that far-famed
     house?


                               Arjuna

     From your own lips let me hear it.


                               Chitra

     Arjuna, the conqueror of the world.  I have culled from the
     mouths of the multitude that imperishable name and hidden it with
     care in my maiden heart.  Hermit, why do you look perturbed?  Has
     that name only a deceitful glitter?  Say so, and I will not
     hesitate to break this casket of my heart and throw the false gem
     to the dust.

                               Arjuna


     Be his name and fame, his bravery and prowess false or true, for
     mercy's sake do not banish him from your heart--for he kneels at
     your feet even now.


                               Chitra

     You, Arjuna!


                               Arjuna

     Yes, I am he, the love-hungered guest at your door.


                               Chitra

     Then it is not true that Arjuna has taken a vow of chastity for
     twelve long years?


                               Arjuna

     But you have dissolved my vow even as the moon dissolves the
     night's vow of obscurity.


                               Chitra

     Oh, shame upon you!  What have you seen in me that makes you
     false to yourself?  Whom do you seek in these dark eyes, in these
     milk-white arms, if you are ready to pay for her the price of
     your probity?  Not my true self, I know.  Surely this cannot be
     love, this is not man's highest homage to woman!  Alas, that this
     frail disguise, the body, should make one blind to the light of
     the deathless spirit!  Yes, now indeed, I know, Arjuna, the fame
     of your heroic manhood is false.


                               Arjuna

     Ah, I feel how vain is fame, the pride of prowess!  Everything
     seems to me a dream.  You alone are perfect; you are the wealth
     of the world, the end of all poverty, the goal of all efforts,
     the one woman!  Others there are who can be but slowly known.
     While to see you for a moment is to see perfect completeness
     once and for ever.


                               Chitra

     Alas, it is not I, not I, Arjuna!  It is the deceit of a god.
     Go, go, my hero, go.  Woo not falsehood, offer not your great
     heart to an illusion.  Go.




SCENE III

                               Chitra

     No, impossible.  To face that fervent gaze that almost grasps you
     like clutching hands of the hungry spirit within; to feel his
     heart struggling to break its bounds urging its passionate cry
     through the entire body--and then to send him away like a
     beggar--no, impossible.


                  Enter MADANA and VASANTA.

     Ah, god of love, what fearful flame is this with which thou hast
     enveloped me!  I burn, and I burn whatever I touch.


                               Madana

     I desire to know what happened last night.


                               Chitra

     At evening I lay down on a grassy bed strewn with the petals of
     spring flowers, and recollected the wonderful praise of my beauty
     I had heard from Arjuna;--drinking drop by drop the honey that I
     had stored during the long day.  The history of my past life like
     that of my former existences was forgotten.  I felt like a
     flower, which has but a few fleeting hours to listen to all the
     humming flatteries and whispered murmurs of the woodlands and
     then must lower its eyes from the Sky, bend its head and at a
     breath give itself up to the dust without a cry, thus ending the
     short story of a perfect moment that has neither past nor future.


                              Vasanta

     A limitless life of glory can bloom and spend itself in a
     morning.


                               Madana

     Like an endless meaning in the narrow span of a song.


                               Chitra

     The southern breeze caressed me to sleep.  From the flowering
     Malati bower overhead silent kisses dropped over my body.
     On my hair, my breast, my feet, each flower chose a bed to die
     on.  I slept.  And, suddenly in the depth of my sleep, I felt as
     if some intense eager look, like tapering fingers of flame,
     touched my slumbering body.  I started up and saw the Hermit
     standing before me.  The moon had moved to the west, peering
     through the leaves to espy this wonder of divine art wrought in a
     fragile human frame.  The air was heavy with perfume; the silence
     of the night was vocal with the chirping of crickets; the
     reflections of the trees hung motionless in the lake; and with
     his staff in his hand he stood, tall and straight and still, like
     a forest tree.  It seemed to me that I had, on opening my eyes,
     died to all realities of life and undergone a dream birth into a
     shadow land.  Shame slipped to my feet like loosened clothes.  I
     heard his call--"Beloved, my most beloved!"  And all my forgotten
     lives united as one and responded to it.  I said, "Take me, take
     all I am!"  And I stretched out my arms to him.  The moon set
     behind the trees.  One curtain of darkness covered all.  Heaven
     and earth, time and space, pleasure and pain, death and life
     merged together in an unbearable ecstasy. . . . With the first
     gleam of light, the first twitter of birds, I rose up and sat
     leaning on my left arm.  He lay asleep with a vague smile about
     his lips like the crescent moon in the morning.  The rosy red
     glow of the dawn fell upon his noble forehead.  I sighed and
     stood up.  I drew together the leafy lianas to screen the
     streaming sun from his face.  I looked about me and saw the same
     old earth.  I remembered what I used to be, and ran and ran like
     a deer afraid of her own shadow, through the forest path strewn
     with shephali flowers.  I found a lonely nook, and sitting down
     covered my face with both hands, and tried to weep and cry.  But
     no tears came to my eyes.


                               Madana

     Alas, thou daughter of mortals!  I stole from the divine
     Storehouse the fragrant wine of heaven, filled with it one
     earthly night to the brim, and placed it in thy hand to drink--
     yet still I hear this cry of anguish!


                      Chitra [bitterly]

     Who drank it?  The rarest completion of life's desire, the first
     union of love was proffered to me, but was wrested from my grasp?
     This borrowed beauty, this falsehood that enwraps me, will slip
     from me taking with it the only monument of that sweet union, as
     the petals fall from an overblown flower; and the woman ashamed
     of her naked poverty will sit weeping day and night.  Lord Love,
     this cursed appearance companions me like a demon robbing me of
     all the prizes of love--all the kisses for which my heart is
     athirst.


                               Madana

     Alas, how vain thy single night had been!  The barque of joy came
     in sight, but the waves would not let it touch the shore.


                               Chitra

     Heaven came so close to my hand that I forgot for a moment that
     it had not reached me.  But when I woke in the morning from my
     dream I found that my body had become my own rival.  It is my
     hateful task to deck her every day, to send her to my beloved and
     see her caressed by him.  O god, take back thy boon!


                               Madana

     But if I take it from you how can you stand before your lover?
     To snatch away the cup from his lips when he has scarcely drained
     his first draught of pleasure, would not that be cruel?  With
     what resentful anger he must regard thee then?


                               Chitra

     That would be better far than this.  I will reveal my true self
     to him, a nobler thing than this disguise.  If he rejects it, if
     he spurns me and breaks my heart, I will bear even that in
     silence.


                              Vasanta

     Listen to my advice.  When with the advent of autumn the
     flowering season is over then comes the triumph of fruitage.  A
     time will come of itself when the heat-cloyed bloom of the body
     will droop and Arjuna will gladly accept the abiding fruitful
     truth in thee.  O child, go back to thy mad festival.




SCENE IV

                               Chitra

     WHY do you watch me like that, my warrior?


                               Arjuna

     I watch how you weave that garland.  Skill and grace, the twin
     brother and sister, are dancing playfully on your finger tips.  I
     am watching and thinking.


                               Chitra

     What are you thinking, sir?


                               Arjuna

     I am thinking that you, with this same lightness of touch and
     sweetness, are weaving my days of exile into an immortal wreath,
     to crown me when I return home.


                               Chitra

     Home!  But this love is not for a home!


                               Arjuna

     Not for a home?


                               Chitra

     No.  Never talk of that.  Take to your home what is abiding and
     strong.  Leave the little wild flower where it was born; leave it
     beautifully to die at the day's end among all fading blossoms and
     decaying leaves.   Do not take it to your palace hall to fling it
     on the stony floor which knows no pity for things that fade and
     are forgotten.


                               Arjuna

     Is ours that kind of love?


                               Chitra

     Yes, no other!  Why regret it?  That which was meant for idle
     days should never outlive them.  Joy turns into pain when the
     door by which it should depart is shut against it.  Take it and
     keep it as long as it lasts.  Let not the satiety of your evening
     claim more than the desire of your morning could earn. . . . The
     day is done.  Put this garland on.  I am tired.  Take me in your
     arms, my love.  Let all vain bickerings of discontent die away at
     the sweet meeting of our lips.


                               Arjuna

     Hush!  Listen, my beloved, the sound of prayer bells from the
     distant village temple steals upon the evening air across the
     silent trees!




SCENE V

                              Vasanta

     I CANNOT keep pace with thee, my friend!  I am tired.  It is a
     hard task to keep alive the fire thou hast kindled.  Sleep
     overtakes me, the fan drops from my hand, and cold ashes cover
     the glow of the fire.  I start up again from my slumber and with
     all my might rescue the weary flame.  But this can go on no
     longer.


                               Madana

     I know, thou art as fickle as a child.  Ever restless is thy play
     in heaven and on earth.  Things that thou for days buildest up
     with endless detail thou dost shatter in a moment without regret.
     But this work of ours is nearly finished.  Pleasure-winged days
     fly fast, and the year, almost at its end, swoons in rapturous
     bliss.




SCENE VI

                               Arjuna


     I WOKE in the morning and found that my dreams had distilled a
     gem.  I have no casket to inclose it, no king's crown whereon to
     fix it, no chain from which to hang it, and yet have not the
     heart to throw it away.  My Kshatriya's right arm, idly occupied
     in holding it, forgets its duties.


                           Enter CHITRA.

                               Chitra

     Tell me your thoughts, sir!


                               Arjuna

     My mind is busy with thoughts of hunting today.  See, how the
     rain pours in torrents and fiercely beats upon the hillside.  The
     dark shadow of the clouds hangs heavily over the forest, and the
     swollen stream, like reckless youth, overleaps all barriers with
     mocking laughter.  On such rainy days we five brothers would go
     to the Chitraka forest to chase wild beasts.  Those were glad
     times. Our hearts danced to the drumbeat of rumbling clouds.  The
     woods resounded with the screams of peacocks.  Timid deer could
     not hear our approaching steps for the patter of rain and the
     noise of waterfalls; the leopards would leave their tracks on the
     wet earth, betraying their lairs.  Our sport over, we dared each
     other to swim across turbulent streams on our way back home.  The
     restless spirit is on me.  I long to go hunting.


                               Chitra

     First run down the quarry you are now following.  Are you quite
     certain that the enchanted deer you pursue must needs be caught?
     No, not yet.  Like a dream the wild creature eludes you when it
     seems most nearly yours.  Look how the wind is chased by the mad
     rain that discharges a thousand arrows after it.  Yet it goes
     free and unconquered.  Our sport is like that, my love!  You give
     chase to the fleet-footed spirit of beauty, aiming at her every
     dart you have in your hands.  Yet this magic deer runs ever free
     and untouched.


                               Arjuna

     My love, have you no home where kind hearts are waiting for your
     return?  A home which you once made sweet with your gentle
     service and whose light went out when you left it for this
     wilderness?


                               Chitra

     Why these questions?  Are the hours of unthinking pleasure over?
     Do you not know that I am no more than what you see before you?
     For me there is no vista beyond.  The dew that hangs on the tip
     of a Kinsuka petal has neither name nor destination.  It offers
     no answer to any question.  She whom you love is like that
     perfect bead of dew.


                               Arjuna

     Has she no tie with the world?  Can she be merely like a fragment
     of heaven dropped on the earth through the carelessness of a
     wanton god?


                               Chitra

     Yes.


                               Arjuna

     Ah, that is why I always seem about to lose you.  My heart is
     unsatisfied, my mind knows no peace.  Come closer to me,
     unattainable one!  Surrender yourself to the bonds of name and
     home and parentage.  Let my heart feel you on all sides and live
     with you in the peaceful security of love.


                               Chitra

     Why this vain effort to catch and keep the tints of the clouds,
     the dance of the waves, the smell of the flowers?


                               Arjuna

     Mistress mine, do not hope to pacify love with airy nothings.
     Give me something to clasp, something that can last longer than
     pleasure, that can endure even through suffering.


                               Chitra

     Hero mine, the year is not yet full, and you are tired already!
     Now I know that it is Heaven's blessing that has made the
     flower's term of life short.  Could this body of mine have
     drooped and died with the flowers of last spring it surely would
     have died with honour.  Yet, its days are numbered, my love.
     Spare it not, press it dry of honey, for fear your beggar's heart
     come back to it again and again with unsated desire, like a
     thirsty bee when summer blossoms lie dead in the dust.




SCENE VII

                               Madana

     TONIGHT is thy last night.


                              Vasanta

     The loveliness of your body will return tomorrow to the
     inexhaustible stores of the spring.  The ruddy tint of thy lips
     freed from the memory of Arjuna's kisses, will bud anew as a pair
     of fresh asoka leaves, and the soft, white glow of thy skin will
     be born again in a hundred fragrant jasmine flowers.


                               Chitra

     O gods, grant me this my prayer!  Tonight, in its last hour let
     my beauty flash its brightest, like the final flicker of a dying
     flame.


                               Madana

     Thou shalt have thy wish.




SCENE VIII

                             Villagers

     WHO will protect us now?


                               Arjuna

     Why, by what danger are you threatened?


                             Villagers

     The robbers are pouring from the northern hills like a mountain
     flood to devastate our village.


                               Arjuna

     Have you in this kingdom no warden?


                             Villagers

     Princess Chitra was the terror of all evil doers.  While she was
     in this happy land we feared natural deaths, but had no other
     fears.  Now she has gone on a pilgrimage, and none knows where to
     find her.


                               Arjuna

     Is the warden of this country a woman?


                             Villagers


     Yes, she is our father and mother in one.
                                                       [Exeunt.


                           Enter CHITRA.

                               Chitra

     Why are you sitting all alone?


                               Arjuna

     I am trying to imagine what kind of woman Princess Chitra may be.
     I hear so many stories of her from all sorts of men.


                               Chitra

     Ah, but she is not beautiful.  She has no such lovely eyes as
     mine, dark as death.  She can pierce any target she will, but not
     our hero's heart.


                               Arjuna

     They say that in valour she is a man, and a woman in tenderness.


                               Chitra

     That, indeed, is her greatest misfortune.  When a woman is merely
     a woman; when she winds herself round and round men's hearts with
     her smiles and sobs and services and caressing endearments; then
     she is happy.  Of what use to her are learning and great
     achievements?  Could you have seen her only yesterday in the
     court of the Lord Shiva's temple by the forest path, you would
     have passed by without deigning to look at her.  But have you
     grown so weary of woman's beauty that you seek in her for a man's
     strength?

     With green leaves wet from the spray of the foaming waterfall, I
     have made our noonday bed in a cavern dark as night.  There the
     cool of the soft green mosses thick on the black and dripping
     stone, kisses your eyes to sleep.  Let me guide you thither.


                               Arjuna

     Not today, beloved.


                               Chitra

     Why not today?


                               Arjuna

     I have heard that a horde of robbers has neared the plains.
     Needs must I go and prepare my weapons to protect the frightened
     villagers.


                               Chitra

     You need have no fear for them.  Before she started on her
     pilgrimage, Princess Chitra had set strong guards at all the
     frontier passes.


                               Arjuna

     Yet permit me for a short while to set about a Kshatriya's work.
     With new glory will I ennoble this idle arm, and make of it a
     pillow more worthy of your head.


                               Chitra

     What if I refuse to let you go, if I keep you entwined in my
     arms?  Would you rudely snatch yourself free and leave me?  Go
     then!  But you must know that the liana, once broken in two,
     never joins again.  Go, if your thirst is quenched.  But, if not,
     then remember that the goddess of pleasure is fickle, and waits
     for no man.  Sit for a while, my lord!  Tell me what uneasy
     thoughts tease you.  Who occupied your mind today?  Is it Chitra?


                               Arjuna

     Yes, it is Chitra.  I wonder in fulfilment of what vow she has
     gone on her pilgrimage.  Of what could she stand in need?


                               Chitra

     Her needs?  Why, what has she ever had, the unfortunate creature?
     Her very qualities are as prison walls, shutting her woman's
     heart in a bare cell.  She is obscured, she is unfulfilled.  Her
     womanly love must content itself dressed in rags; beauty is
     denied  her.   She  is like the spirit of  a  cheerless  morning,
     sitting upon the stony mountain peak, all her light blotted out
     by dark clouds.  Do not ask me of her life.  It will never sound
     sweet to man's ear.


                               Arjuna

     I am eager to learn all about her.  I am like a traveller come to
     a strange city at midnight.  Domes and towers and garden-trees
     look vague and shadowy, and the dull moan of the sea comes
     fitfully through the silence of sleep.  Wistfully he waits for
     the morning to reveal to him all the strange wonders.  Oh, tell
     me her story.


                               Chitra

     What more is there to tell?


                               Arjuna

     I seem to see her, in my mind's eye, riding on a white horse,
     proudly holding the reins in her left hand, and in her right a
     bow, and like the Goddess of Victory dispensing glad hope all
     round her.  Like a watchful lioness she protects the litter at
     her dugs with a fierce love.  Woman's arms, though adorned with
     naught but unfettered strength, are beautiful!  My heart is
     restless, fair one, like a serpent reviving from his long
     winter's sleep.  Come, let us both race on swift horses side by
     side, like twin orbs of light sweeping through space.  Out from
     this slumbrous prison of green gloom, this dank, dense cover of
     perfumed intoxication, choking breath.


                               Chitra

     Arjuna, tell me true, if, now at once, by some magic I could
     shake myself free from this voluptuous softness, this timid bloom
     of beauty shrinking from the rude and healthy touch of the world,
     and fling it from my body like borrowed clothes, would you be
     able to bear it?  If I stand up straight and strong with the
     strength of a daring heart spurning the wiles and arts of twining
     weakness, if I hold my head high like a tall young mountain fir,
     no longer trailing in the dust like a liana, shall I then appeal
     to man's eye?   No, no, you could not endure it.  It is better
     that I should keep spread about me all the dainty playthings of
     fugitive youth, and wait for you in patience.  When it pleases
     you to return, I will smilingly pour out for you the wine of
     pleasure in the cup of this beauteous body.  When you are tired
     and satiated with this wine, you can go to work or play; and when
     I grow old I will accept humbly and gratefully whatever corner is
     left for me.  Would it please your heroic soul if the playmate of
     the night aspired to be the helpmeet of the day, if the left arm
     learnt to share the burden of the proud right arm?


                               Arjuna

     I never seem to know you aright.  You seem to me like a goddess
     hidden within a golden image.  I cannot touch you, I cannot pay
     you my dues in return for your priceless gifts.  Thus my love is
     incomplete.  Sometimes in the enigmatic depth of your sad look,
     in your playful words mocking at their own meaning, I gain
     glimpses of a being trying to rend asunder the languorous grace
     of her body, to emerge in a chaste fire of pain through a
     vaporous veil of smiles.  Illusion is the first appearance of
     Truth.  She advances towards her lover in disguise.  But a time
     comes when she throws off her ornaments and veils and stands
     clothed in naked dignity.  I grope for that ultimate you, that
     bare simplicity of truth.

     Why these tears, my love?  Why cover your face with your hands?
     Have I pained you, my darling?  Forget what I said.  I will be
     content with the present.  Let each separate moment of beauty
     come to me like a bird of mystery from its unseen nest in the
     dark  bearing  a message of music.  Let me for ever sit  with
     my hope on the brink of its realization, and thus end my days.




SCENE IX

                         CHITRA and ARJUNA

                      Chitra [cloaked]

     My lord, has the cup been drained to the last drop?  Is this,
     indeed, the end? No, when all is done something still remains,
     and that is my last sacrifice at your feet.

     I brought from the garden of heaven flowers of incomparable
     beauty with which to worship you, god of my heart.  If the rites
     are over, if the flowers have faded, let me throw them out of the
     temple [unveiling in her original male attire].  Now, look
     at your worshipper with gracious eyes.

     I am not beautifully perfect as the flowers with which I
     worshipped.  I have many flaws and blemishes.  I am a
     traveller in the great world-path, my garments are dirty,
     and my feet are bleeding with thorns.  Where should I achieve
     flower-beauty, the unsullied loveliness of a moment's life?  The
     gift that I proudly bring you is the heart of a woman.  Here have
     all pains and joys gathered, the hopes and fears and shames of a
     daughter of the dust; here love springs up struggling toward
     immortal life.  Herein lies an imperfection which yet is noble
     and grand.  If the flower-service is finished, my master, accept
     this as your servant for the days to come!

     I am Chitra, the king's daughter.  Perhaps you will remember the
     day when a woman came to you in the temple of Shiva, her body
     loaded with ornaments and finery.  That shameless woman came to
     court you as though she were a man.  You rejected her; you did
     well.  My lord, I am that woman.  She was my disguise.  Then by
     the boon of gods I obtained for a year the most radiant form that
     a mortal ever wore, and wearied my hero's heart with the burden
     of that deceit.  Most surely I am not that woman.

     I am Chitra.  No goddess to be worshipped, nor yet the
     object of common pity to be brushed aside like a moth with
     indifference.  If you deign to keep me by your side in the path
     of danger and daring, if you allow me to share the great duties
     of your life, then you will know my true self.  If your babe,
     whom  I  am nourishing in my womb be born a son, I  shall  myself
     teach him to be a second Arjuna, and send him to you when the
     time comes, and then at last you will truly know me. Today I can
     only offer you Chitra, the daughter of a king.


                               Arjuna

     Beloved, my life is full.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHITRA, A PLAY IN ONE ACT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Creative Unity
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Creative Unity

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: October 21, 2007 [eBook #23136]
                Most recently updated: January 3, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Irma Spehar and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CREATIVE UNITY ***




Produced by Michael Ciesielski, Irma pehar and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





                            CREATIVE UNITY

                                  BY

                          RABINDRANATH TAGORE

                      MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
                      ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
                                 1922

                      MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

                  LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA · MADRAS
                               MELBOURNE

                         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

                      NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
                        DALLAS · SAN FRANCISCO

                   THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.

                                TORONTO

                               COPYRIGHT

                       PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




                                  TO
                          DR. EDWIN H. LEWIS




                             INTRODUCTION


It costs me nothing to feel that I am; it is no burden to me. And yet
if the mental, physical, chemical, and other innumerable facts
concerning all branches of knowledge which have united in myself could
be broken up, they would prove endless. It is some untold mystery of
unity in me, that has the simplicity of the infinite and reduces the
immense mass of multitude to a single point.

This One in me knows the universe of the many. But, in whatever it
knows, it knows the One in different aspects. It knows this room only
because this room is One to it, in spite of the seeming contradiction
of the endless facts contained in the single fact of the room. Its
knowledge of a tree is the knowledge of a unity, which appears in the
aspect of a tree.

This One in me is creative. Its creations are a pastime, through which
it gives expression to an ideal of unity in its endless show of
variety. Such are its pictures, poems, music, in which it finds joy
only because they reveal the perfect forms of an inherent unity.

This One in me not only seeks unity in knowledge for its understanding
and creates images of unity for its delight; it also seeks union in
love for its fulfilment. It seeks itself in others. This is a fact,
which would be absurd had there been no great medium of truth to give
it reality. In love we find a joy which is ultimate because it is the
ultimate truth. Therefore it is said in the Upanishads that the
_advaitam_ is _anantam_,--"the One is Infinite"; that the _advaitam_
is _anandam_,--"the One is Love."

To give perfect expression to the One, the Infinite, through the
harmony of the many; to the One, the Love, through the sacrifice of
self, is the object alike of our individual life and our society.




                               CONTENTS


                                        PAGE

INTRODUCTION                              v

THE POET'S RELIGION                       3

THE CREATIVE IDEAL                       31

THE RELIGION OF THE FOREST               45

AN INDIAN FOLK RELIGION                  69

EAST AND WEST                            93

THE MODERN AGE                          115

THE SPIRIT OF FREEDOM                   133

THE NATION                              143

WOMAN AND HOME                          157

AN EASTERN UNIVERSITY                   169




                          THE POET'S RELIGION

                                   I


Civility is beauty of behaviour. It requires for its perfection
patience, self-control, and an environment of leisure. For genuine
courtesy is a creation, like pictures, like music. It is a harmonious
blending of voice, gesture and movement, words and action, in which
generosity of conduct is expressed. It reveals the man himself and has
no ulterior purpose.

Our needs are always in a hurry. They rush and hustle, they are rude
and unceremonious; they have no surplus of leisure, no patience for
anything else but fulfilment of purpose. We frequently see in our
country at the present day men utilising empty kerosene cans for
carrying water. These cans are emblems of discourtesy; they are curt
and abrupt, they have not the least shame for their unmannerliness,
they do not care to be ever so slightly more than useful.

The instruments of our necessity assert that we must have food,
shelter, clothes, comforts and convenience. And yet men spend an
immense amount of their time and resources in contradicting this
assertion, to prove that they are not a mere living catalogue of
endless wants; that there is in them an ideal of perfection, a sense
of unity, which is a harmony between parts and a harmony with
surroundings.

The quality of the infinite is not the magnitude of extension, it is
in the _Advaitam_, the mystery of Unity. Facts occupy endless time and
space; but the truth comprehending them all has no dimension; it is
One. Wherever our heart touches the One, in the small or the big, it
finds the touch of the infinite.

I was speaking to some one of the joy we have in our personality. I
said it was because we were made conscious by it of a spirit of unity
within ourselves. He answered that he had no such feeling of joy about
himself, but I was sure he exaggerated. In all probability he had been
suffering from some break of harmony between his surroundings and the
spirit of unity within him, proving all the more strongly its truth.
The meaning of health comes home to us with painful force when disease
disturbs it; since health expresses the unity of the vital functions
and is accordingly joyful. Life's tragedies occur, not to demonstrate
their own reality, but to reveal that eternal principle of joy in
life, to which they gave a rude shaking. It is the object of this
Oneness in us to realise its infinity by perfect union of love with
others. All obstacles to this union create misery, giving rise to the
baser passions that are expressions of finitude, of that separateness
which is negative and therefore _máyá_.

The joy of unity within ourselves, seeking expression, becomes
creative; whereas our desire for the fulfilment of our needs is
constructive. The water vessel, taken as a vessel only, raises the
question, "Why does it exist at all?" Through its fitness of
construction, it offers the apology for its existence. But where it is
a work of beauty it has no question to answer; it has nothing to do,
but to be. It reveals in its form a unity to which all that seems
various in it is so related that, in a mysterious manner, it strikes
sympathetic chords to the music of unity in our own being.

What is the truth of this world? It is not in the masses of substance,
not in the number of things, but in their relatedness, which neither
can be counted, nor measured, nor abstracted. It is not in the
materials which are many, but in the expression which is one. All our
knowledge of things is knowing them in their relation to the Universe,
in that relation which is truth. A drop of water is not a particular
assortment of elements; it is the miracle of a harmonious mutuality,
in which the two reveal the One. No amount of analysis can reveal to
us this mystery of unity. Matter is an abstraction; we shall never be
able to realise what it is, for our world of reality does not
acknowledge it. Even the giant forces of the world, centripetal and
centrifugal, are kept out of our recognition. They are the
day-labourers not admitted into the audience-hall of creation. But
light and sound come to us in their gay dresses as troubadours singing
serenades before the windows of the senses. What is constantly before
us, claiming our attention, is not the kitchen, but the feast; not the
anatomy of the world, but its countenance. There is the dancing ring
of seasons; the elusive play of lights and shadows, of wind and water;
the many-coloured wings of erratic life flitting between birth and
death. The importance of these does not lie in their existence as mere
facts, but in their language of harmony, the mother-tongue of our own
soul, through which they are communicated to us.

We grow out of touch with this great truth, we forget to accept its
invitation and its hospitality, when in quest of external success our
works become unspiritual and unexpressive. This is what Wordsworth
complained of when he said:

    The world is too much with us; late and soon,
    Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.
    Little we see in Nature that is ours.

But it is not because the world has grown too familiar to us; on the
contrary, it is because we do not see it in its aspect of unity,
because we are driven to distraction by our pursuit of the
fragmentary.

Materials as materials are savage; they are solitary; they are ready
to hurt one another. They are like our individual impulses seeking the
unlimited freedom of wilfulness. Left to themselves they are
destructive. But directly an ideal of unity raises its banner in their
centre, it brings these rebellious forces under its sway and creation
is revealed--the creation which is peace, which is the unity of
perfect relationship. Our greed for eating is in itself ugly and
selfish, it has no sense of decorum; but when brought under the ideal
of social fellowship, it is regulated and made ornamental; it is
changed into a daily festivity of life. In human nature sexual passion
is fiercely individual and destructive, but dominated by the ideal of
love, it has been made to flower into a perfection of beauty, becoming
in its best expression symbolical of the spiritual truth in man which
is his kinship of love with the Infinite. Thus we find it is the One
which expresses itself in creation; and the Many, by giving up
opposition, make the revelation of unity perfect.


                                  II

I remember, when I was a child, that a row of cocoanut trees by our
garden wall, with their branches beckoning the rising sun on the
horizon, gave me a companionship as living as I was myself. I know it
was my imagination which transmuted the world around me into my own
world--the imagination which seeks unity, which deals with it. But we
have to consider that this companionship was true; that the universe
in which I was born had in it an element profoundly akin to my own
imaginative mind, one which wakens in all children's natures the
Creator, whose pleasure is in interweaving the web of creation with
His own patterns of many-coloured strands. It is something akin to us,
and therefore harmonious to our imagination. When we find some strings
vibrating in unison with others, we know that this sympathy carries in
it an eternal reality. The fact that the world stirs our imagination
in sympathy tells us that this creative imagination is a common truth
both in us and in the heart of existence. Wordsworth says:

                              I'd rather be
    A pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
    So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
    Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
    Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea,
    Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.

In this passage the poet says we are less forlorn in a world which we
meet with our imagination. That can only be possible if through our
imagination is revealed, behind all appearances, the reality which
gives the touch of companionship, that is to say, something which has
an affinity to us. An immense amount of our activity is engaged in
making images, not for serving any useful purpose or formulating
rational propositions, but for giving varied responses to the varied
touches of this reality. In this image-making the child creates his
own world in answer to the world in which he finds himself. The child
in us finds glimpses of his eternal playmate from behind the veil of
things, as Proteus rising from the sea, or Triton blowing his wreathèd
horn. And the playmate is the Reality, that makes it possible for the
child to find delight in activities which do not inform or bring
assistance but merely express. There is an image-making joy in the
infinite, which inspires in us our joy in imagining. The rhythm of
cosmic motion produces in our mind the emotion which is creative.

A poet has said about his destiny as a dreamer, about the
worthlessness of his dreams and yet their permanence:

    I hang 'mid men my heedless head,
    And my fruit is dreams, as theirs is bread:
    The goodly men and the sun-hazed sleeper,
    Time shall reap; but after the reaper
    The world shall glean to me, me the sleeper.

The dream persists; it is more real than even bread which has
substance and use. The painted canvas is durable and substantial; it
has for its production and transport to market a whole array of
machines and factories. But the picture which no factory can produce
is a dream, a _máyá_, and yet it, not the canvas, has the meaning of
ultimate reality.

A poet describes Autumn:

    I saw old Autumn in the misty morn
    Stand shadowless like Silence, listening
    To silence, for no lonely bird would sing
    Into his hollow ear from woods forlorn.

Of April another poet sings:

        April, April,
    Laugh thy girlish laughter;
    Then the moment after
    Weep thy girlish tears!
    April, that mine ears
    Like a lover greetest,
    If I tell thee, sweetest,
    All my hopes and fears.

        April, April,
    Laugh thy golden laughter.
    But the moment after
    Weep thy golden tears!

This Autumn, this April,--are they nothing but phantasy?

Let us suppose that the Man from the Moon comes to the earth and
listens to some music in a gramophone. He seeks for the origin of the
delight produced in his mind. The facts before him are a cabinet made
of wood and a revolving disc producing sound; but the one thing which
is neither seen nor can be explained is the truth of the music, which
his personality must immediately acknowledge as a personal message. It
is neither in the wood, nor in the disc, nor in the sound of the
notes. If the Man from the Moon be a poet, as can reasonably be
supposed, he will write about a fairy imprisoned in that box, who sits
spinning fabrics of songs expressing her cry for a far-away magic
casement opening on the foam of some perilous sea, in a fairyland
forlorn. It will not be literally, but essentially true. The facts of
the gramophone make us aware of the laws of sound, but the music gives
us personal companionship. The bare facts about April are alternate
sunshine and showers; but the subtle blending of shadows and lights,
of murmurs and movements, in April, gives us not mere shocks of
sensation, but unity of joy as does music. Therefore when a poet sees
the vision of a girl in April, even a downright materialist is in
sympathy with him. But we know that the same individual would be
menacingly angry if the law of heredity or a geometrical problem were
described as a girl or a rose--or even as a cat or a camel. For these
intellectual abstractions have no magical touch for our lute-strings
of imagination. They are no dreams, as are the harmony of bird-songs,
rain-washed leaves glistening in the sun, and pale clouds floating in
the blue.

The ultimate truth of our personality is that we are no mere
biologists or geometricians; "we are the dreamers of dreams, we are
the music-makers." This dreaming or music-making is not a function of
the lotus-eaters, it is the creative impulse which makes songs not
only with words and tunes, lines and colours, but with stones and
metals, with ideas and men:

    With wonderful deathless ditties
    We build up the world's great cities,
    And out of a fabulous story
    We fashion an empire's glory.

I have been told by a scholar friend of mine that by constant practice
in logic he has weakened his natural instinct of faith. The reason is,
faith is the spectator in us which finds the meaning of the drama from
the unity of the performance; but logic lures us into the greenroom
where there is stagecraft but no drama at all; and then this logic
nods its head and wearily talks about disillusionment. But the
greenroom, dealing with its fragments, looks foolish when questioned,
or wears the sneering smile of Mephistopheles; for it does not have
the secret of unity, which is somewhere else. It is for faith to
answer, "Unity comes to us from the One, and the One in ourselves
opens the door and receives it with joy." The function of poetry and
the arts is to remind us that the greenroom is the greyest of
illusions, and the reality is the drama presented before us, all its
paint and tinsel, masks and pageantry, made one in art. The ropes and
wheels perish, the stage is changed; but the dream which is drama
remains true, for there remains the eternal Dreamer.


                                  III

Poetry and the arts cherish in them the profound faith of man in the
unity of his being with all existence, the final truth of which is the
truth of personality. It is a religion directly apprehended, and not a
system of metaphysics to be analysed and argued. We know in our
personal experience what our creations are and we instinctively know
through it what creation around us means.

When Keats said in his "Ode to a Grecian Urn":

    Thou, silent form, dost tease us out of thought,
    As doth eternity,...

he felt the ineffable which is in all forms of perfection, the mystery
of the One, which takes us beyond all thought into the immediate
touch of the Infinite. This is the mystery which is for a poet to
realise and to reveal. It comes out in Keats' poems with struggling
gleams through consciousness of suffering and despair:

    Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth
    Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
    Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darken'd ways
    Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,
    Some shape of beauty moves away the pall
    From our dark spirits.

In this there is a suggestion that truth reveals itself in beauty. For
if beauty were mere accident, a rent in the eternal fabric of things,
then it would hurt, would be defeated by the antagonism of facts.
Beauty is no phantasy, it has the everlasting meaning of reality. The
facts that cause despondence and gloom are mere mist, and when through
the mist beauty breaks out in momentary gleams, we realise that Peace
is true and not conflict, Love is true and not hatred; and Truth is
the One, not the disjointed multitude. We realise that Creation is the
perpetual harmony between the infinite ideal of perfection and the
eternal continuity of its realisation; that so long as there is no
absolute separation between the positive ideal and the material
obstacle to its attainment, we need not be afraid of suffering and
loss. This is the poet's religion.

Those who are habituated to the rigid framework of sectarian creeds
will find such a religion as this too indefinite and elastic. No doubt
it is so, but only because its ambition is not to shackle the Infinite
and tame it for domestic use; but rather to help our consciousness to
emancipate itself from materialism. It is as indefinite as the
morning, and yet as luminous; it calls our thoughts, feelings, and
actions into freedom, and feeds them with light. In the poet's
religion we find no doctrine or injunction, but rather the attitude of
our entire being towards a truth which is ever to be revealed in its
own endless creation.

In dogmatic religion all questions are definitely answered, all doubts
are finally laid to rest. But the poet's religion is fluid, like the
atmosphere round the earth where lights and shadows play
hide-and-seek, and the wind like a shepherd boy plays upon its reeds
among flocks of clouds. It never undertakes to lead anybody anywhere
to any solid conclusion; yet it reveals endless spheres of light,
because it has no walls round itself. It acknowledges the facts of
evil; it openly admits "the weariness, the fever and the fret" in the
world "where men sit and hear each other groan"; yet it remembers that
in spite of all there is the song of the nightingale, and "haply the
Queen Moon is on her throne," and there is:

    White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine,
    Fast-fading violets covered up in leaves;
            And mid-day's eldest child,
    The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,
    The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.

But all this has not the definiteness of an answer; it has only the
music that teases us out of thought as it fills our being.

Let me read a translation from an Eastern poet to show how this idea
comes out in a poem in Bengali:

        In the morning I awoke at the flutter of thy boat-sails,
    Lady of my Voyage, and I left the shore to follow the beckoning waves.
        I asked thee, "Does the dream-harvest ripen in the
            island beyond the blue?"
        The silence of thy smile fell on my question like
            the silence of sunlight on waves.
        The day passed on through storm and through calm,
    The perplexed winds changed their course, time after time,
            and the sea moaned.
        I asked thee, "Does thy sleep-tower stand somewhere beyond the
            dying embers of the day's funeral pyre?"
    No answer came from thee, only thine eyes smiled like
            the edge of a sunset cloud.
        It is night. Thy figure grows dim in the dark.
    Thy wind-blown hair flits on my cheek and thrills my
            sadness with its scent.
        My hands grope to touch the hem of thy robe, and
    I ask thee--"Is there thy garden of death beyond the stars,
            Lady of my Voyage, where thy silence blossoms into songs?"
        Thy smile shines in the heart of the hush like the
            star-mist of midnight.


                                  IV

In Shelley we clearly see the growth of his religion through periods
of vagueness and doubt, struggle and searching. But he did at length
come to a positive utterance of his faith, though he died young. Its
final expression is in his "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty." By the title
of the poem the poet evidently means a beauty that is not merely a
passive quality of particular things, but a spirit that manifests
itself through the apparent antagonism of the unintellectual life.
This hymn rang out of his heart when he came to the end of his
pilgrimage and stood face to face with the Divinity, glimpses of which
had already filled his soul with restlessness. All his experiences of
beauty had ever teased him with the question as to what was its truth.
Somewhere he sings of a nosegay which he makes of violets, daisies,
tender bluebells and--

                That tall flower that wets,
    Like a child, half in tenderness and mirth,
    Its mother's face with heaven-collected tears.

He ends by saying:

                  And then, elate and gay,
    I hastened to the spot whence I had come,
    That I might there present it!--Oh! to whom?

This question, even though not answered, carries a significance. A
creation of beauty suggests a fulfilment, which is the fulfilment of
love. We have heard some poets scoff at it in bitterness and despair;
but it is like a sick child beating its own mother--it is a sickness
of faith, which hurts truth, but proves it by its very pain and anger.
And the faith itself is this, that beauty is the self-offering of the
One to the other One.

In the first part of his "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" Shelley dwells
on the inconstancy and evanescence of the manifestation of beauty,
which imparts to it an appearance of frailty and unreality:

    Like hues and harmonies of evening,
        Like clouds in starlight widely spread,
        Like memory of music fled.

This, he says, rouses in our mind the question:

    Why aught should fail and fade that once is shown,
        Why fear and dream and death and birth
        Cast on the daylight of this earth
        Such gloom,--why man has such a scope
    For love and hate, despondency and hope?

The poet's own answer to this question is:

        Man were immortal, and omnipotent,
    Didst thou, unknown and awful as thou art,
    Keep with thy glorious train firm state within his heart.

This very elusiveness of beauty suggests the vision of immortality and
of omnipotence, and stimulates the effort in man to realise it in some
idea of permanence. The highest reality has actively to be achieved.
The gain of truth is not in the end; it reveals itself through the
endless length of achievement. But what is there to guide us in our
voyage of realisation? Men have ever been struggling for direction:

    Therefore the names of Demon, Ghost, and Heaven
    Remain the records of their vain endeavour,
    Frail spells,--whose uttered charm might not avail to sever,
    From all we hear and all we see,
    Doubt, chance and mutability.

The prevalent rites and practices of piety, according to this poet,
are like magic spells--they only prove men's desperate endeavour and
not their success. He knows that the end we seek has its own direct
call to us, its own light to guide us to itself. And truth's call is
the call of beauty. Of this he says:

    Thy light alone,--like mist o'er mountain driven,
          Or music by the night wind sent,
    Thro' strings of some still instrument,
          Or moonlight on a midnight stream
    Gives grace and truth to life's unquiet dream.

About this revelation of truth which calls us on, and yet which is
everywhere, a village singer of Bengal sings:

    My master's flute sounds in everything,
        drawing me out of my house to everywhere.
    While I listen to it I know that every step I take
        is in my master's house.
    For he is the sea, he is the river that leads to the sea,
        and he is the landing place.

Religion, in Shelley, grew with his life; it was not given to him in
fixed and ready-made doctrines; he rebelled against them. He had the
creative mind which could only approach Truth through its joy in
creative effort. For true creation is realisation of truth through the
translation of it into our own symbols.


                                   V

For man, the best opportunity for such a realisation has been in men's
Society. It is a collective creation of his, through which his social
being tries to find itself in its truth and beauty. Had that Society
merely manifested its usefulness, it would be inarticulate like a dark
star. But, unless it degenerates, it ever suggests in its concerted
movements a living truth as its soul, which has personality. In this
large life of social communion man feels the mystery of Unity, as he
does in music. From the sense of that Unity, men came to the sense of
their God. And therefore every religion began with its tribal God.

The one question before all others that has to be answered by our
civilisations is not what they have and in what quantity, but what
they express and how. In a society, the production and circulation of
materials, the amassing and spending of money, may go on, as in the
interminable prolonging of a straight line, if its people forget to
follow some spiritual design of life which curbs them and transforms
them into an organic whole. For growth is not that enlargement which
is merely adding to the dimensions of incompleteness. Growth is the
movement of a whole towards a yet fuller wholeness. Living things
start with this wholeness from the beginning of their career. A child
has its own perfection as a child; it would be ugly if it appeared as
an unfinished man. Life is a continual process of synthesis, and not
of additions. Our activities of production and enjoyment of wealth
attain that spirit of wholeness when they are blended with a creative
ideal. Otherwise they have the insane aspect of the eternally
unfinished; they become like locomotive engines which have railway
lines but no stations; which rush on towards a collision of
uncontrolled forces or to a sudden breakdown of the overstrained
machinery.

Through creation man expresses his truth; through that expression he
gains back his truth in its fulness. Human society is for the best
expression of man, and that expression, according to its perfection,
leads him to the full realisation of the divine in humanity. When that
expression is obscure, then his faith in the Infinite that is within
him becomes weak; then his aspiration cannot go beyond the idea of
success. His faith in the Infinite is creative; his desire for success
is constructive; one is his home, and the other is his office. With
the overwhelming growth of necessity, civilisation becomes a gigantic
office to which the home is a mere appendix. The predominance of the
pursuit of success gives to society the character of what we call
_Shudra_ in India. In fighting a battle, the _Kshatriya_, the noble
knight, followed his honour for his ideal, which was greater than
victory itself; but the mercenary _Shudra_ has success for his object.
The name Shudra symbolises a man who has no margin round him beyond
his bare utility. The word denotes a classification which includes all
naked machines that have lost their completeness of humanity, be their
work manual or intellectual. They are like walking stomachs or brains,
and we feel, in pity, urged to call on God and cry, "Cover them up for
mercy's sake with some veil of beauty and life!"

When Shelley in his view of the world realised the Spirit of Beauty,
which is the vision of the Infinite, he thus uttered his faith:

          Never joy illumed my brow
    Unlinked with hope that thou wouldst free
          This world from its dark slavery;
          That thou,--O awful Loveliness,--
    Wouldst give whate'er these words cannot express.

This was his faith in the Infinite. It led his aspiration towards the
region of freedom and perfection which was beyond the immediate and
above the successful. This faith in God, this faith in the reality of
the ideal of perfection, has built up all that is great in the human
world. To keep indefinitely walking on, along a zigzag course of
change, is negative and barren. A mere procession of notes does not
make music; it is only when we have in the heart of the march of
sounds some musical idea that it creates song. Our faith in the
infinite reality of Perfection is that musical idea, and there is that
one great creative force in our civilisation. When it wakens not, then
our faith in money, in material power, takes its place; it fights and
destroys, and in a brilliant fireworks of star-mimicry suddenly
exhausts itself and dies in ashes and smoke.


                                  VI

Men of great faith have always called us to wake up to great
expectations, and the prudent have always laughed at them and said
that these did not belong to reality. But the poet in man knows that
reality is a creation, and human reality has to be called forth from
its obscure depth by man's faith which is creative. There was a day
when the human reality was the brutal reality. That was the only
capital we had with which to begin our career. But age after age
there has come to us the call of faith, which said against all the
evidence of fact: "You are more than you appear to be, more than your
circumstances seem to warrant. You are to attain the impossible, you
are immortal." The unbelievers had laughed and tried to kill the
faith. But faith grew stronger with the strength of martyrdom and at
her bidding higher realities have been created over the strata of the
lower. Has not a new age come to-day, borne by thunder-clouds, ushered
in by a universal agony of suffering? Are we not waiting to-day for a
great call of faith, which will say to us: "Come out of your present
limitations. You are to attain the impossible, you are immortal"? The
nations who are not prepared to accept it, who have all their trust in
their present machines of system, and have no thought or space to
spare to welcome the sudden guest who comes as the messenger of
emancipation, are bound to court defeat whatever may be their present
wealth and power.

This great world, where it is a creation, an expression of the
infinite--where its morning sings of joy to the newly awakened life,
and its evening stars sing to the traveller, weary and worn, of the
triumph of life in a new birth across death,--has its call for us.
The call has ever roused the creator in man, and urged him to reveal
the truth, to reveal the Infinite in himself. It is ever claiming from
us, in our own creations, co-operation with God, reminding us of our
divine nature, which finds itself in freedom of spirit. Our society
exists to remind us, through its various voices, that the ultimate
truth in man is not in his intellect or his possessions; it is in his
illumination of mind, in his extension of sympathy across all barriers
of caste and colour; in his recognition of the world, not merely as a
storehouse of power, but as a habitation of man's spirit, with its
eternal music of beauty and its inner light of the divine
presence.




                          THE CREATIVE IDEAL


In an old Sanskrit book there is a verse which describes the essential
elements of a picture. The first in order is _Vrúpa-bhédáh_--"separateness
of forms." Forms are many, forms are different, each of them having
its limits. But if this were absolute, if all forms remained
obstinately separate, then there would be a fearful loneliness of
multitude. But the varied forms, in their very separateness, must
carry something which indicates the paradox of their ultimate unity,
otherwise there would be no creation.

So in the same verse, after the enumeration of separateness comes that
of _Pram[=a]n[=a]ni_--proportions. Proportions indicate relationship,
the principle of mutual accommodation. A leg dismembered from the body
has the fullest licence to make a caricature of itself. But, as a
member of the body, it has its responsibility to the living unity
which rules the body; it must behave properly, it must keep its
proportion. If, by some monstrous chance of physiological
profiteering, it could outgrow by yards its fellow-stalker, then we
know what a picture it would offer to the spectator and what
embarrassment to the body itself. Any attempt to overcome the law of
proportion altogether and to assert absolute separateness is
rebellion; it means either running the gauntlet of the rest, or
remaining segregated.

The same Sanskrit word _Pram[=a]n[=a]ni_, which in a book of æsthetics
means proportions, in a book of logic means the proofs by which the
truth of a proposition is ascertained. All proofs of truth are
credentials of relationship. Individual facts have to produce such
passports to show that they are not expatriated, that they are not a
break in the unity of the whole. The logical relationship present in
an intellectual proposition, and the æsthetic relationship indicated
in the proportions of a work of art, both agree in one thing. They
affirm that truth consists, not in facts, but in harmony of facts. Of
this fundamental note of reality it is that the poet has said, "Beauty
is truth, truth beauty."

Proportions, which prove relativity, form the outward language of
creative ideals. A crowd of men is desultory, but in a march of
soldiers every man keeps his proportion of time and space and relative
movement, which makes him one with the whole vast army. But this is
not all. The creation of an army has, for its inner principle, one
single idea of the General. According to the nature of that ruling
idea, a production is either a work of art or a mere construction. All
the materials and regulations of a joint-stock company have the unity
of an inner motive. But the expression of this unity itself is not the
end; it ever indicates an ulterior purpose. On the other hand, the
revelation of a work of art is a fulfilment in itself.

The consciousness of personality, which is the consciousness of unity
in ourselves, becomes prominently distinct when coloured by joy or
sorrow, or some other emotion. It is like the sky, which is visible
because it is blue, and which takes different aspect with the change
of colours. In the creation of art, therefore, the energy of an
emotional ideal is necessary; as its unity is not like that of a
crystal, passive and inert, but actively expressive. Take, for
example, the following verse:

    Oh, fly not Pleasure, pleasant-hearted Pleasure,
    Fold me thy wings, I prithee, yet and stay.
        For my heart no measure
        Knows, nor other treasure
    To buy a garland for my love to-day.

    And thou too, Sorrow, tender-hearted Sorrow,
    Thou grey-eyed mourner, fly not yet away.
        For I fain would borrow
        Thy sad weeds to-morrow,
    To make a mourning for love's yesterday.

The words in this quotation, merely showing the metre, would have no
appeal to us; with all its perfection and its proportion, rhyme and
cadence, it would only be a construction. But when it is the outer
body of an inner idea it assumes a personality. The idea flows through
the rhythm, permeates the words and throbs in their rise and fall. On
the other hand, the mere idea of the above-quoted poem, stated in
unrhythmic prose, would represent only a fact, inertly static, which
would not bear repetition. But the emotional idea, incarnated in a
rhythmic form, acquires the dynamic quality needed for those things
which take part in the world's eternal pageantry.

Take the following doggerel:

    Thirty days hath September,
    April, June, and November.

The metre is there, and it simulates the movement of life. But it
finds no synchronous response in the metre of our heart-beats; it has
not in its centre the living idea which creates for itself an
indivisible unity. It is like a bag which is convenient, and not like
a body which is inevitable.

This truth, implicit in our own works of art, gives us the clue to the
mystery of creation. We find that the endless rhythms of the world are
not merely constructive; they strike our own heart-strings and produce
music.

Therefore it is we feel that this world is a creation; that in its
centre there is a living idea which reveals itself in an eternal
symphony, played on innumerable instruments, all keeping perfect time.
We know that this great world-verse, that runs from sky to sky, is not
made for the mere enumeration of facts--it is not "Thirty days hath
September"--it has its direct revelation in our delight. That delight
gives us the key to the truth of existence; it is personality acting
upon personalities through incessant manifestations. The solicitor
does not sing to his client, but the bridegroom sings to his bride.
And when our soul is stirred by the song, we know it claims no fees
from us; but it brings the tribute of love and a call from the
bridegroom.

It may be said that in pictorial and other arts there are some designs
that are purely decorative and apparently have no living and inner
ideal to express. But this cannot be true. These decorations carry the
emotional motive of the artist, which says: "I find joy in my
creation; it is good." All the language of joy is beauty. It is
necessary to note, however, that joy is not pleasure, and beauty not
mere prettiness. Joy is the outcome of detachment from self and lives
in freedom of spirit. Beauty is that profound expression of reality
which satisfies our hearts without any other allurements but its own
ultimate value. When in some pure moments of ecstasy we realise this
in the world around us, we see the world, not as merely existing, but
as decorated in its forms, sounds, colours and lines; we feel in our
hearts that there is One who through all things proclaims: "I have joy
in my creation."

That is why the Sanskrit verse has given us for the essential elements
of a picture, not only the manifoldness of forms and the unity of
their proportions, but also _bhávah_, the emotional idea.

It is needless to say that upon a mere expression of emotion--even the
best expression of it--no criterion of art can rest. The following
poem is described by the poet as "An earnest Suit to his unkind
Mistress":

    And wilt thou leave me thus?
    Say nay, say nay, for shame!
    To save thee from the blame
    Of all my grief and grame.
    And wilt thou leave me thus?
        Say nay! say nay!

I am sure the poet would not be offended if I expressed my doubts
about the earnestness of his appeal, or the truth of his avowed
necessity. He is responsible for the lyric and not for the sentiment,
which is mere material. The fire assumes different colours according
to the fuel used; but we do not discuss the fuel, only the flames. A
lyric is indefinably more than the sentiment expressed in it, as a
rose is more than its substance. Let us take a poem in which the
earnestness of sentiment is truer and deeper than the one I have
quoted above:

                  The sun,
    Closing his benediction,
    Sinks, and the darkening air
    Thrills with the sense of the triumphing night,--
    Night with her train of stars
    And her great gift of sleep.
        So be my passing!

    My task accomplished and the long day done,
    My wages taken, and in my heart
    Some late lark singing,
    Let me be gathered to the quiet West,
    The sundown splendid and serene,
        Death.

The sentiment expressed in this poem is a subject for a psychologist.
But for a poem the subject is completely merged in its poetry, like
carbon in a living plant which the lover of plants ignores, leaving it
for a charcoal-burner to seek.

This is why, when some storm of feeling sweeps across the country, art
is under a disadvantage. In such an atmosphere the boisterous passion
breaks through the cordon of harmony and thrusts itself forward as the
subject, which with its bulk and pressure dethrones the unity of
creation. For a similar reason most of the hymns used in churches
suffer from lack of poetry. For in them the deliberate subject,
assuming the first importance, benumbs or kills the poem. Most
patriotic poems have the same deficiency. They are like hill streams
born of sudden showers, which are more proud of their rocky beds than
of their water currents; in them the athletic and arrogant subject
takes it for granted that the poem is there to give it occasion to
display its powers. The subject is the material wealth for the sake of
which poetry should never be tempted to barter her soul, even though
the temptation should come in the name and shape of public good or
some usefulness. Between the artist and his art must be that perfect
detachment which is the pure medium of love. He must never make use of
this love except for its own perfect expression.

In everyday life our personality moves in a narrow circle of immediate
self-interest. And therefore our feelings and events, within that
short range, become prominent subjects for ourselves. In their
vehement self-assertion they ignore their unity with the All. They
rise up like obstructions and obscure their own background. But art
gives our personality the disinterested freedom of the eternal, there
to find it in its true perspective. To see our own home in flames is
not to see fire in its verity. But the fire in the stars is the fire
in the heart of the Infinite; there, it is the script of creation.

Matthew Arnold, in his poem addressed to a nightingale, sings:

    Hark! ah, the nightingale--
    The tawny-throated!
    Hark, from that moonlit cedar what a burst!
    What triumph! hark!--what pain!

But pain, when met within the boundaries of limited reality, repels
and hurts; it is discordant with the narrow scope of life. But the
pain of some great martyrdom has the detachment of eternity. It
appears in all its majesty, harmonious in the context of everlasting
life; like the thunder-flash in the stormy sky, not on the laboratory
wire. Pain on that scale has its harmony in great love; for by hurting
love it reveals the infinity of love in all its truth and beauty. On
the other hand, the pain involved in business insolvency is
discordant; it kills and consumes till nothing remains but ashes.

The poet sings again:

    How thick the bursts come crowding through the leaves!
    Eternal Passion!
    Eternal Pain!

And the truth of pain in eternity has been sung by those Vedic poets
who had said, "From joy has come forth all creation." They say:

    Sa tapas tapatvá sarvam asrajata Yadidam kincha.

    (God from the heat of his pain created all that there is.)

The sacrifice, which is in the heart of creation, is both joy and pain
at the same moment. Of this sings a village mystic in Bengal:

                        My eyes drown in the darkness of joy,
    My heart, like a lotus, closes its petals in the rapture of the
        dark night.

That song speaks of a joy which is deep like the blue sea, endless
like the blue sky; which has the magnificence of the night, and in its
limitless darkness enfolds the radiant worlds in the awfulness of
peace; it is the unfathomed joy in which all sufferings are made one.

A poet of mediæval India tells us about his source of inspiration in a
poem containing a question and an answer:

    Where were your songs, my bird, when you spent your nights in the nest?
    Was not all your pleasure stored therein?
    What makes you lose your heart to the sky, the sky that is limitless?

The bird answers:

    I had my pleasure while I rested within bounds.
    When I soared into the limitless, I found my songs!

To detach the individual idea from its confinement of everyday facts
and to give its soaring wings the freedom of the universal: this is
the function of poetry. The ambition of Macbeth, the jealousy of
Othello, would be at best sensational in police court proceedings; but
in Shakespeare's dramas they are carried among the flaming
constellations where creation throbs with Eternal Passion, Eternal
Pain.




                      THE RELIGION OF THE FOREST

                                   I


We stand before this great world. The truth of our life depends upon
our attitude of mind towards it--an attitude which is formed by our
habit of dealing with it according to the special circumstance of our
surroundings and our temperaments. It guides our attempts to establish
relations with the universe either by conquest or by union, either
through the cultivation of power or through that of sympathy. And
thus, in our realisation of the truth of existence, we put our
emphasis either upon the principle of dualism or upon the principle of
unity.

The Indian sages have held in the Upanishads that the emancipation of
our soul lies in its realising the ultimate truth of unity. They said:

    Ishávásyam idam sarvam yat kinch jagatyám jagat.
    Yéna tyakténa bhunjithá má graha kasyasvit dhanam.

     (Know all that moves in this moving world as enveloped by
     God; and find enjoyment through renunciation, not through
     greed of possession.)

The meaning of this is, that, when we know the multiplicity of things
as the final truth, we try to augment ourselves by the external
possession of them; but, when we know the Infinite Soul as the final
truth, then through our union with it we realise the joy of our soul.
Therefore it has been said of those who have attained their
fulfilment,--"sarvam evá vishanti" (they enter into all things). Their
perfect relation with this world is the relation of union.

This ideal of perfection preached by the forest-dwellers of ancient
India runs through the heart of our classical literature and still
dominates our mind. The legends related in our epics cluster under the
forest shade bearing all through their narrative the message of the
forest-dwellers. Our two greatest classical dramas find their
background in scenes of the forest hermitage, which are permeated by
the association of these sages.

The history of the Northmen of Europe is resonant with the music of
the sea. That sea is not merely topographical in its significance, but
represents certain ideals of life which still guide the history and
inspire the creations of that race. In the sea, nature presented
herself to those men in her aspect of a danger, a barrier which
seemed to be at constant war with the land and its children. The sea
was the challenge of untamed nature to the indomitable human soul. And
man did not flinch; he fought and won, and the spirit of fight
continued in him. This fight he still maintains; it is the fight
against disease and poverty, tyranny of matter and of man.

This refers to a people who live by the sea, and ride on it as on a
wild, champing horse, catching it by its mane and making it render
service from shore to shore. They find delight in turning by force the
antagonism of circumstances into obedience. Truth appears to them in
her aspect of dualism, the perpetual conflict of good and evil, which
has no reconciliation, which can only end in victory or defeat.

But in the level tracts of Northern India men found no barrier between
their lives and the grand life that permeates the universe. The forest
entered into a close living relationship with their work and leisure,
with their daily necessities and contemplations. They could not think
of other surroundings as separate or inimical. So the view of the
truth, which these men found, did not make manifest the difference,
but rather the unity of all things. They uttered their faith in these
words: "Yadidam kinch sarvam prâna éjati nihsratam" (All that is
vibrates with life, having come out from life). When we know this
world as alien to us, then its mechanical aspect takes prominence in
our mind; and then we set up our machines and our methods to deal with
it and make as much profit as our knowledge of its mechanism allows us
to do. This view of things does not play us false, for the machine has
its place in this world. And not only this material universe, but
human beings also, may be used as machines and made to yield powerful
results. This aspect of truth cannot be ignored; it has to be known
and mastered. Europe has done so and has reaped a rich harvest.

The view of this world which India has taken is summed up in one
compound Sanskrit word, Sachid[=a]nanda. The meaning is that Reality,
which is essentially one, has three phases. The first is Sat; it is
the simple fact that things are, the fact which relates us to all
things through the relationship of common existence. The second is
Chit; it is the fact that we know, which relates us to all things
through the relationship of knowledge. The third is Ananda: it is the
fact that we enjoy, which unites us with all things through the
relationship of love.

According to the true Indian view, our consciousness of the world,
merely as the sum total of things that exist, and as governed by laws,
is imperfect. But it is perfect when our consciousness realises all
things as spiritually one with it, and therefore capable of giving us
joy. For us the highest purpose of this world is not merely living in
it, knowing it and making use of it, but realising our own selves in
it through expansion of sympathy; not alienating ourselves from it and
dominating it, but comprehending and uniting it with ourselves in
perfect union.


                                  II

When Vikramâditya became king, Ujjayini a great capital, and Kâlidâsa
its poet, the age of India's forest retreats had passed. Then we had
taken our stand in the midst of the great concourse of humanity. The
Chinese and the Hun, the Scythian and the Persian, the Greek and the
Roman, had crowded round us. But, even in that age of pomp and
prosperity, the love and reverence with which its poet sang about the
hermitage shows what was the dominant ideal that occupied the mind of
India; what was the one current of memory that continually flowed
through her life.

In Kâlidâsa's drama, _Shakuntalâ_, the hermitage, which dominates the
play, overshadowing the king's palace, has the same idea running
through it--the recognition of the kinship of man with conscious and
unconscious creation alike.

A poet of a later age, while describing a hermitage in his Kâdambari,
tells us of the posture of salutation in the flowering lianas as they
bow to the wind; of the sacrifice offered by the trees scattering
their blossoms; of the grove resounding with the lessons chanted by
the neophytes, and the verses repeated by the parrots, learnt by constantly
hearing them; of the wild-fowl enjoying "vaishva-deva-bali-pinda"
(the food offered to the divinity which is in all creatures); of the
ducks coming up from the lake for their portion of the grass seed
spread in the cottage yards to dry; and of the deer caressing with
their tongues the young hermit boys. It is again the same story. The
hermitage shines out, in all our ancient literature, as the place
where the chasm between man and the rest of creation has been bridged.

In the Western dramas, human characters drown our attention in the
vortex of their passions. Nature occasionally peeps out, but she is
almost always a trespasser, who has to offer excuses, or bow
apologetically and depart. But in all our dramas which still retain
their fame, such as _Mrit-Shakatikâ_, _Shakuntalâ_, _Uttara-Râmacharita_,
Nature stands on her own right, proving that she has her great
function, to impart the peace of the eternal to human emotions.

The fury of passion in two of Shakespeare's youthful poems is
exhibited in conspicuous isolation. It is snatched away, naked, from
the context of the All; it has not the green earth or the blue sky
around it; it is there ready to bring to our view the raging fever
which is in man's desires, and not the balm of health and repose which
encircles it in the universe.

_Ritûsamhâra_ is clearly a work of Kâlidâsa's immaturity. The youthful
love-song in it does not reach the sublime reticence which is in
_Shakuntalâ_ and _Kumâra-Sambhava_. But the tune of these voluptuous
outbreaks is set to the varied harmony of Nature's symphony. The
moonbeams of the summer evening, resonant with the flow of fountains,
acknowledge it as a part of its own melody. In its rhythm sways the
Kadamba forest, glistening in the first cool rain of the season; and
the south breezes, carrying the scent of the mango blossoms, temper it
with their murmur.

In the third canto of _Kumâra-Sambhava_, Madana, the God Eros, enters
the forest sanctuary to set free a sudden flood of desire amid the
serenity of the ascetics' meditation. But the boisterous outbreak of
passion so caused was shown against a background of universal life.
The divine love-thrills of Sati and Shiva found their response in the
world-wide immensity of youth, in which animals and trees have their
life-throbs.

Not only its third canto but the whole of the Kumâra-Sambhava poem is
painted upon a limitless canvas. It tells of the eternal wedding of
love, its wooing and sacrifice, and its fulfilment, for which the gods
wait in suspense. Its inner idea is deep and of all time. It answers
the one question that humanity asks through all its endeavours: "How
is the birth of the hero to be brought about, the brave one who can
defy and vanquish the evil demon laying waste heaven's own kingdom?"

It becomes evident that such a problem had become acute in Kâlidâsa's
time, when the old simplicity of Hindu life had broken up. The Hindu
kings, forgetful of their duties, had become self-seeking epicureans,
and India was being repeatedly devastated by the Scythians. What
answer, then, does the poem give to the question it raises? Its
message is that the cause of weakness lies in the inner life of the
soul. It is in some break of harmony with the Good, some dissociation
from the True. In the commencement of the poem we find that the God
Shiva, the Good, had remained for long lost in the self-centred
solitude of his asceticism, detached from the world of reality. And
then Paradise was lost. But _Kumâra-Sambhava_ is the poem of Paradise
Regained. How was it regained? When Sati, the Spirit of Reality,
through humiliation, suffering, and penance, won the Heart of Shiva,
the Spirit of Goodness. And thus, from the union of the freedom of the
real with the restraint of the Good, was born the heroism that
released Paradise from the demon of Lawlessness.

Viewed from without, India, in the time of Kâlidâsa, appeared to have
reached the zenith of civilisation, excelling as she did in luxury,
literature and the arts. But from the poems of Kâlidâsa it is evident
that this very magnificence of wealth and enjoyment worked against the
ideal that sprang and flowed forth from the sacred solitude of the
forest. These poems contain the voice of warnings against the
gorgeous unreality of that age, which, like a Himalayan avalanche, was
slowly gliding down to an abyss of catastrophe. And from his seat
beside all the glories of Vikramâditya's throne the poet's heart
yearns for the purity and simplicity of India's past age of spiritual
striving. And it was this yearning which impelled him to go back to
the annals of the ancient Kings of Raghu's line for the narrative
poem, in which he traced the history of the rise and fall of the ideal
that should guide the rulers of men.

King Dilipa, with Queen Sudakshinâ, has entered upon the life of the
forest. The great monarch is busy tending the cattle of the hermitage.
Thus the poem opens, amid scenes of simplicity and self-denial. But it
ends in the palace of magnificence, in the extravagance of
self-enjoyment. With a calm restraint of language the poet tells us of
the kingly glory crowned with purity. He begins his poem as the day
begins, in the serenity of sunrise. But lavish are the colours in
which he describes the end, as of the evening, eloquent for a time
with the sumptuous splendour of sunset, but overtaken at last by the
devouring darkness which sweeps away all its brilliance into night.

In this beginning and this ending of his poem there lies hidden that
message of the forest which found its voice in the poet's words. There
runs through the narrative the idea that the future glowed gloriously
ahead only when there was in the atmosphere the calm of self-control,
of purity and renunciation. When downfall had become imminent, the
hungry fires of desire, aflame at a hundred different points, dazzled
the eyes of all beholders.

Kâlidâsa in almost all his works represented the unbounded
impetuousness of kingly splendour on the one side and the serene
strength of regulated desires on the other. Even in the minor drama of
_Mâlavikâgnimitra_ we find the same thing in a different manner. It
must never be thought that, in this play, the poet's deliberate object
was to pander to his royal patron by inviting him to a literary orgy
of lust and passion. The very introductory verse indicates the object
towards which this play is directed. The poet begins the drama with
the prayer, "Sanmârgâlókayan vyapanayatu sa nastâmasi vritimishah"
(Let God, to illumine for us the path of truth, sweep away our
passions, bred of darkness). This is the God Shiva, in whose nature
Parvati, the eternal Woman, is ever commingled in an ascetic purity of
love. The unified being of Shiva and Parvati is the perfect symbol of
the eternal in the wedded love of man and woman. When the poet opens
his drama with an invocation of this Spirit of the Divine Union it is
evident that it contains in it the message with which he greets his
kingly audience. The whole drama goes to show the ugliness of the
treachery and cruelty inherent in unchecked self-indulgence. In the
play the conflict of ideals is between the King and the Queen, between
Agnimitra and Dhârini, and the significance of the contrast lies
hidden in the very names of the hero and the heroine. Though the name
Agnimitra is historical, yet it symbolises in the poet's mind the
destructive force of uncontrolled desire--just as did the name
Agnivarna in _Raghuvamsha_. Agnimitra, "the friend of the fire," the
reckless person, who in his love-making is playing with fire, not
knowing that all the time it is scorching him black. And what a great
name is Dhârini, signifying the fortitude and forbearance that comes
from majesty of soul! What an association it carries of the infinite
dignity of love, purified by a self-abnegation that rises far above
all insult and baseness of betrayal!

In _Shakuntalâ_ this conflict of ideals has been shown, all through
the drama, by the contrast of the pompous heartlessness of the king's
court and the natural purity of the forest hermitage. The drama opens
with a hunting scene, where the king is in pursuit of an antelope. The
cruelty of the chase appears like a menace symbolising the spirit of
the king's life clashing against the spirit of the forest retreat,
which is "sharanyam sarva-bhútânâm" (where all creatures find their
protection of love). And the pleading of the forest-dwellers with the
king to spare the life of the deer, helplessly innocent and beautiful,
is the pleading that rises from the heart of the whole drama. "Never,
oh, never is the arrow meant to pierce the tender body of a deer, even
as the fire is not for the burning of flowers."

In the _Râmâyana_, Râma and his companions, in their banishment, had
to traverse forest after forest; they had to live in leaf-thatched
huts, to sleep on the bare ground. But as their hearts felt their
kinship with woodland, hill, and stream, they were not in exile amidst
these. Poets, brought up in an atmosphere of different ideals, would
have taken this opportunity of depicting in dismal colours the
hardship of the forest-life in order to bring out the martyrdom of
Râmachandra with all the emphasis of a strong contrast. But, in the
_Râmâyana_, we are led to realise the greatness of the hero, not in a
fierce struggle with Nature, but in sympathy with it. Sitâ, the
daughter-in-law of a great kingly house, goes along the forest paths.
We read:

"She asks Râma about the flowering trees, and shrubs and creepers
which she has not seen before. At her request Lakshmana gathers and
brings her plants of all kinds, exuberant with flowers, and it
delights her heart to see the forest rivers, variegated with their
streams and sandy banks, resounding with the call of heron and duck.

"When Râma first took his abode in the Chitrakuta peak, that
delightful Chitrakuta, by the Mâlyavati river, with its easy slopes
for landing, he forgot all the pain of leaving his home in the capital
at the sight of those woodlands, alive with beast and bird."

Having lived on that hill for long, Râma, who was "giri-vana-priya"
(lover of the mountain and the forest), said one day to Sitâ:

"When I look upon the beauties of this hill, the loss of my kingdom
troubles me no longer, nor does the separation from my friends cause
me any pang."

Thus passed Râmachandra's exile, now in woodland, now in hermitage.
The love which Râma and Sitâ bore to each other united them, not only
to each other, but to the universe of life. That is why, when Sitâ was
taken away, the loss seemed to be so great to the forest itself.


                                  III

Strangely enough, in Shakespeare's dramas, like those of Kâlidâsa, we
find a secret vein of complaint against the artificial life of the
king's court--the life of ungrateful treachery and falsehood. And
almost everywhere, in his dramas, foreign scenes have been introduced
in connection with some working of the life of unscrupulous ambition.
It is perfectly obvious in _Timon of Athens_--but there Nature offers
no message or balm to the injured soul of man. In _Cymbeline_ the
mountainous forest and the cave appear in their aspect of obstruction
to life's opportunities. These only seem tolerable in comparison with
the vicissitudes of fortune in the artificial court life. In _As You
Like It_ the forest of Arden is didactic in its lessons. It does not
bring peace, but preaches, when it says:

    Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
    Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
    More free from peril than the envious court?

In the _Tempest_, through Prospero's treatment of Ariel and Caliban we
realise man's struggle with Nature and his longing to sever connection
with her. In _Macbeth_, as a prelude to a bloody crime of treachery
and treason, we are introduced to a scene of barren heath where the
three witches appear as personifications of Nature's malignant forces;
and in _King Lear_ it is the fury of a father's love turned into
curses by the ingratitude born of the unnatural life of the court that
finds its symbol in the storm on the heath. The tragic intensity of
_Hamlet_ and _Othello_ is unrelieved by any touch of Nature's
eternity. Except in a passing glimpse of a moonlight night in the love
scene in the _Merchant of Venice_, Nature has not been allowed in
other dramas of this series, including _Romeo and Juliet_ and _Antony
and Cleopatra_, to contribute her own music to the music of man's
love. In _The Winter's Tale_ the cruelty of a king's suspicion stands
bare in its relentlessness, and Nature cowers before it, offering no
consolation.

I hope it is needless for me to say that these observations are not
intended to minimise Shakespeare's great power as a dramatic poet, but
to show in his works the gulf between Nature and human nature owing to
the tradition of his race and time. It cannot be said that beauty of
nature is ignored in his writings; only he fails to recognise in them
the truth of the inter-penetration of human life with the cosmic life
of the world. We observe a completely different attitude of mind in
the later English poets like Wordsworth and Shelley, which can be
attributed in the main to the great mental change in Europe, at that
particular period, through the influence of the newly discovered
philosophy of India which stirred the soul of Germany and aroused the
attention of other Western countries.

In Milton's _Paradise Lost_, the very subject--Man dwelling in the
garden of Paradise--seems to afford a special opportunity for bringing
out the true greatness of man's relationship with Nature. But though
the poet has described to us the beauties of the garden, though he has
shown to us the animals living there in amity and peace among
themselves, there is no reality of kinship between them and man. They
were created for man's enjoyment; man was their lord and master. We
find no trace of the love between the first man and woman gradually
surpassing themselves and overflowing the rest of creation, such as we
find in the love scenes in _Kumâra-Sambhava_ and _Shakuntalâ_. In the
seclusion of the bower, where the first man and woman rested in the
garden of Paradise--

                  Bird, beast, insect or worm
    Durst enter none, such was their awe of man.

Not that India denied the superiority of man, but the test of that
superiority lay, according to her, in the comprehensiveness of
sympathy, not in the aloofness of absolute distinction.


                                  IV

India holds sacred, and counts as places of pilgrimage, all spots
which display a special beauty or splendour of nature. These had no
original attraction on account of any special fitness for cultivation
or settlement. Here, man is free, not to look upon Nature as a source
of supply of his necessities, but to realise his soul beyond himself.
The Himâlayas of India are sacred and the Vindhya Hills. Her majestic
rivers are sacred. Lake Mânasa and the confluence of the Ganges and
the Jamuna are sacred. India has saturated with her love and worship
the great Nature with which her children are surrounded, whose light
fills their eyes with gladness, and whose water cleanses them, whose
food gives them life, and from whose majestic mystery comes forth the
constant revelation of the infinite in music, scent, and colour, which
brings its awakening to the soul of man. India gains the world through
worship, through spiritual communion; and the idea of freedom to which
she aspired was based upon the realisation of her spiritual unity.

When, in my recent voyage to Europe, our ship left Aden and sailed
along the sea which lay between the two continents, we passed by the
red and barren rocks of Arabia on our right side and the gleaming
sands of Egypt on our left. They seemed to me like two giant brothers
exchanging with each other burning glances of hatred, kept apart by
the tearful entreaty of the sea from whose womb they had their birth.

There was an immense stretch of silence on the left shore as well as
on the right, but the two shores spoke to me of the two different
historical dramas enacted. The civilisation which found its growth in
Egypt was continued across long centuries, elaborately rich with
sentiments and expressions of life, with pictures, sculptures,
temples, and ceremonials. This was a country whose guardian-spirit was
a noble river, which spread the festivities of life on its banks
across the heart of the land. There man never raised the barrier of
alienation between himself and the rest of the world.

On the opposite shore of the Red Sea the civilisation which grew up in
the inhospitable soil of Arabia had a contrary character to that of
Egypt. There man felt himself isolated in his hostile and bare
surroundings. His idea of God became that of a jealous God. His mind
naturally dwelt upon the principle of separateness. It roused in him
the spirit of fight, and this spirit was a force that drove him far
and wide. These two civilisations represented two fundamental
divisions of human nature. The one contained in it the spirit of
conquest and the other the spirit of harmony. And both of these have
their truth and purpose in human existence.

The characters of two eminent sages have been described in our
mythology. One was Vashishtha and another Vishvâmitra. Both of them
were great, but they represented two different types of wisdom; and
there was conflict between them. Vishvâmitra sought to achieve power
and was proud of it; Vashishtha was rudely smitten by that power. But
his hurt and his loss could not touch the illumination of his soul;
for he rose above them and could forgive. Râmachandra, the great hero
of our epic, had his initiation to the spiritual life from Vashishtha,
the life of inner peace and perfection. But he had his initiation to
war from Vishvâmitra, who called him to kill the demons and gave him
weapons that were irresistible.

Those two sages symbolise in themselves the two guiding spirits of
civilisation. Can it be true that they shall never be reconciled? If
so, can ever the age of peace and co-operation dawn upon the human
world? Creation is the harmony of contrary forces--the forces of
attraction and repulsion. When they join hands, all the fire and fight
are changed into the smile of flowers and the songs of birds. When
there is only one of them triumphant and the other defeated, then
either there is the death of cold rigidity or that of suicidal
explosion.

Humanity, for ages, has been busy with the one great creation of
spiritual life. Its best wisdom, its discipline, its literature and
art, all the teachings and self-sacrifice of its noblest teachers,
have been for this. But the harmony of contrary forces, which give
their rhythm to all creation, has not yet been perfected by man in his
civilisation, and the Creator in him is baffled over and over again.
He comes back to his work, however, and makes himself busy, building
his world in the midst of desolation and ruins. His history is the
history of his aspiration interrupted and renewed. And one truth of
which he must be reminded, therefore, is that the power which
accomplishes the miracle of creation, by bringing conflicting forces
into the harmony of the One, is no passion, but a love which accepts
the bonds of self-control from the joy of its own immensity--a love
whose sacrifice is the manifestation of its endless wealth within
itself.




                        AN INDIAN FOLK RELIGION

                                   I


In historical time the Buddha comes first of those who declared
salvation to all men, without distinction, as by right man's own. What
was the special force which startled men's minds and, almost within
the master's lifetime, spread his teachings over India? It was the
unique significance of the event, when a man came to men and said to
them, "I am here to emancipate you from the miseries of the thraldom
of self." This wisdom came, neither in texts of Scripture, nor in
symbols of deities, nor in religious practices sanctified by ages, but
through the voice of a living man and the love that flowed from a
human heart.

And I believe this was the first occasion in the history of the world
when the idea of the Avatâr found its place in religion. Western
scholars are never tired of insisting that Buddhism is of the nature
of a moral code, coldly leading to the path of extinction. They forget
that it was held to be a religion that roused in its devotees an
inextinguishable fire of enthusiasm and carried them to lifelong exile
across the mountain and desert barriers. To say that a philosophy of
suicide can keep kindled in human hearts for centuries such fervour of
self-sacrifice is to go against all the laws of sane psychology. The
religious enthusiasm which cannot be bound within any daily ritual,
but overflows into adventures of love and beneficence, must have in
its centre that element of personality which rouses the whole soul. In
answer, it may possibly be said that this was due to the personality
of Buddha himself. But that also is not quite true. The personality
which stirs the human heart to its immense depths, leading it to
impossible deeds of heroism, must in that process itself reveal to men
the infinite which is in all humanity. And that is what happened in
Buddhism, making it a religion in the complete sense of the word.

Like the religion of the Upanishads, Buddhism also generated two
divergent currents; the one impersonal, preaching the abnegation of
self through discipline, and the other personal, preaching the
cultivation of sympathy for all creatures, and devotion to the
infinite truth of love; the other, which is called the Mahâyâna, had
its origin in the positive element contained in Buddha's teachings,
which is immeasurable love. It could never, by any logic, find its
reality in the emptiness of the truthless abyss. And the object of
Buddha's meditation and his teachings was to free humanity from
sufferings. But what was the path that he revealed to us? Was it some
negative way of evading pain and seeking security against it? On the
contrary, his path was the path of sacrifice--the utmost sacrifice of
love. The meaning of such sacrifice is to reach some ultimate truth,
some positive ideal, which in its greatness can accept suffering and
transmute it into the profound peace of self-renunciation. True
emancipation from suffering, which is the inalienable condition of the
limited life of the self, can never be attained by fleeing from it,
but rather by changing its value in the realm of truth--the truth of
the higher life of love.

We have learnt that, by calculations made in accordance with the law
of gravitation, some planets were discovered exactly in the place
where they should be. Such a law of gravitation there is also in the
moral world. And when we find men's minds disturbed, as they were by
the preaching of the Buddha, we can be sure, even without any
corroborative evidence, that there must have been some great luminous
body of attraction, positive and powerful, and not a mere unfathomable
vacancy. It is exactly this which we discover in the heart of the
Mahâyâna system; and we have no hesitation in saying that the truth of
Buddhism is there. The oil has to be burnt, not for the purpose of
diminishing it, but for the purpose of giving light to the lamp. And
when the Buddha said that the self must go, he said at the same moment
that love must be realised. Thus originated the doctrine of the
Dharma-kâya, the Infinite Wisdom and Love manifested in the Buddha. It
was the first instance, as I have said, when men felt that the
Universal and the Eternal Spirit was revealed in a human individual
whom they had known and touched. The joy was too great for them, since
the very idea itself came to them as a freedom--a freedom from the
sense of their measureless insignificance. It was the first time, I
repeat, when the individual, as a man, felt in himself the Infinite
made concrete.

What was more, those men who felt the love welling forth from the
heart of Buddhism, as one with the current of the Eternal Love itself,
were struck with the idea that such an effluence could never have been
due to a single cataclysm of history--unnatural and therefore untrue.
They felt instead that it was in the eternal nature of truth, that the
event must belong to a series of manifestations; there must have been
numberless other revelations in the past and endless others to follow.

The idea grew and widened until men began to feel that this Infinite
Being was already in every one of them, and that it rested with
themselves to remove the sensual obstructions and reveal him in their
own lives. In every individual there was, they realised, the
potentiality of Buddha--that is to say, the Infinite made manifest.

We have to keep in mind the great fact that the preaching of the
Buddha in India was not followed by stagnation of life--as would
surely have happened if humanity was without any positive goal and his
teaching was without any permanent value in itself. On the contrary,
we find the arts and sciences springing up in its wake, institutions
started for alleviating the misery of all creatures, human and
non-human, and great centres of education founded. Some mighty power
was suddenly roused from its obscurity, which worked for long
centuries and changed the history of man in a large part of the world.
And that power came into its full activity only by the individual
being made conscious of his infinite worth. It was like the sudden
discovery of a great mine of living wealth.

During the period of Buddhism the doctrine of deliverance flourished,
which reached all mankind and released man's inner resources from
neglect and self-insult. Even to-day we see in our own country human
nature, from its despised corner of indignity, slowly and painfully
finding its way to assert the inborn majesty of man. It is like the
imprisoned tree finding a rift in the wall, and sending out its eager
branches into freedom, to prove that darkness is not its birthright,
that its love is for the sunshine. In the time of the Buddha the
individual discovered his own immensity of worth, first by witnessing
a man who united his heart in sympathy with all creatures, in all
worlds, through the power of a love that knew no bounds; and then by
learning that the same light of perfection lay confined within
himself behind the clouds of selfish desire, and that the
Bodhi-hridaya--"the heart of the Eternal Enlightenment"--every moment
claimed its unveiling in his own heart. Nâgârjuna speaks of this
Bodhi-hridaya (another of whose names is Bodhi-Citta) as follows:

     One who understands the nature of the Bodhi-hridaya, sees
     everything with a loving heart; for love is the essence of
     Bodhi-hridaya.[1]

     [Footnote 1: _Outlines of Mahâyâna Buddhism_, by Dr. D. T.
     Suzuki.]

My object in writing this paper is to show, by the further help of
illustration from a popular religious sect of Bengal, that the
religious instinct of man urges him towards a truth, by which he can
transcend the finite nature of the individual self. Man would never
feel the indignity of his limitations if these were inevitable. Within
him he has glimpses of the Infinite, which give him assurance that
this truth is not in his limitations, but that this truth can be
attained by love. For love is the positive quality of the Infinite,
and love's sacrifice accordingly does not lead to emptiness, but to
fulfilment, to Bodhi-hridaya, "the heart of enlightenment."

The members of the religious sect I have mentioned call themselves
"Baül." They live outside social recognition, and their very obscurity
helps them in their seeking, from a direct source, the enlightenment
which the soul longs for, the eternal light of love.

It would be absurd to say that there is little difference between
Buddhism and the religion of these simple people, who have no system
of metaphysics to support their faith. But my object in bringing close
together these two religions, which seem to belong to opposite poles,
is to point out the fundamental unity in them. Both of them believe in
a fulfilment which is reached by love's emancipating us from the
dominance of self. In both these religions we find man's yearning to
attain the infinite worth of his individuality, not through any
conventional valuation of society, but through his perfect
relationship with Truth. They agree in holding that the realisation of
our ultimate object is waiting for us in ourselves. The Baül likens
this fulfilment to the blossoming of a bud, and sings:

    Make way, O bud, make way,
      Burst open thy heart and make way.
    The opening spirit has overtaken thee,
      Canst thou remain a bud any longer?


                                  II

One day, in a small village in Bengal, an ascetic woman from the
neighbourhood came to see me. She had the name "Sarva-khepi" given to
her by the village people, the meaning of which is "the woman who is
mad about all things." She fixed her star-like eyes upon my face and
startled me with the question, "When are you coming to meet me
underneath the trees?" Evidently she pitied me who lived (according to
her) prisoned behind walls, banished away from the great meeting-place
of the All, where she had her dwelling. Just at that moment my
gardener came with his basket, and when the woman understood that the
flowers in the vase on my table were going to be thrown away, to make
place for the fresh ones, she looked pained and said to me, "You are
always engaged reading and writing; you do not see." Then she took the
discarded flowers in her palms, kissed them and touched them with her
forehead, and reverently murmured to herself, "Beloved of my heart." I
felt that this woman, in her direct vision of the infinite personality
in the heart of all things, truly represented the spirit of India.

In the same village I came into touch with some Baül singers. I had
known them by their names, occasionally seen them singing and begging
in the street, and so passed them by, vaguely classifying them in my
mind under the general name of Vairâgis, or ascetics.

The time came when I had occasion to meet with some members of the
same body and talk to them about spiritual matters. The first Baül
song, which I chanced to hear with any attention, profoundly stirred
my mind. Its words are so simple that it makes me hesitate to render
them in a foreign tongue, and set them forward for critical
observation. Besides, the best part of a song is missed when the tune
is absent; for thereby its movement and its colour are lost, and it
becomes like a butterfly whose wings have been plucked.

The first line may be translated thus: "Where shall I meet him, the
Man of my Heart?" This phrase, "the Man of my Heart," is not peculiar
to this song, but is usual with the Baül sect. It means that, for me,
the supreme truth of all existence is in the revelation of the
Infinite in my own humanity.

"The Man of my Heart," to the Baül, is like a divine instrument
perfectly tuned. He gives expression to infinite truth in the music
of life. And the longing for the truth which is in us, which we have
not yet realised, breaks out in the following Baül song:

    Where shall I meet him, the Man of my Heart?
    He is lost to me and I seek him wandering from land to land.

    I am listless for that moonrise of beauty,
        which is to light my life,
        which I long to see in the fulness of vision, in gladness of heart.

The name of the poet who wrote this song was Gagan. He was almost
illiterate; and the ideas he received from his Baül teacher found no
distraction from the self-consciousness of the modern age. He was a
village postman, earning about ten shillings a month, and he died
before he had completed his teens. The sentiment, to which he gave
such intensity of expression, is common to most of the songs of his
sect. And it is a sect, almost exclusively confined to that lower
floor of society, where the light of modern education hardly finds an
entrance, while wealth and respectability shun its utter indigence.

In the song I have translated above, the longing of the singer to
realise the infinite in his own personality is expressed. This has to
be done daily by its perfect expression in life, in love. For the
personal expression of life, in its perfection, is love; just as the
personal expression of truth in its perfection is beauty.

In the political life of the modern age the idea of democracy has
given mankind faith in the individual. It gives each man trust in his
own possibilities, and pride in his humanity. Something of the same
idea, we find, has been working in the popular mind of India, with
regard to its religious consciousness. Over and over again it tries to
assert, not only that God is _for_ each of us, but also that God is
_in_ each of us. These people have no special incarnations in their
simple theology, because they know that God is special to each
individual. They say that to be born a man is the greatest privilege
that can fall to a creature in all the world. They assert that gods in
Paradise envy human beings. Why? Because God's will, in giving his
love, finds its completeness in man's will returning that love.
Therefore Humanity is a necessary factor in the perfecting of the
divine truth. The Infinite, for its self-expression, comes down into
the manifoldness of the Finite; and the Finite, for its
self-realisation, must rise into the unity of the Infinite. Then only
is the Cycle of Truth complete.

The dignity of man, in his eternal right of Truth, finds expression in
the following song, composed, not by a theologian or a man of letters,
but by one who belongs to that ninety per cent of the population of
British India whose education has been far less than elementary, in
fact almost below zero:

    My longing is to meet you in play of love, my Lover;
    But this longing is not only mine, but also yours.
    For your lips can have their smile, and your flute
        its music, only in your delight in my love;
        and therefore you are importunate, even as I am.

If the world were a mere expression of formative forces, then this
song would be pathetic in its presumption. But why is there beauty at
all in creation--the beauty whose only meaning is in a call that
claims disinterestedness as a response? The poet proudly says: "Your
flute could not have its music of beauty if your delight were not in
my love. Your power is great--and there I am not equal to you--but it
lies even in me to make you smile, and if you and I never meet, then
this play of love remains incomplete."

If this were not true, then it would be an utter humiliation to exist
at all in this world. If it were solely _our_ business to seek the
Lover, and _his_ to keep himself passively aloof in the infinity of
his glory, or actively masterful only in imposing his commands upon
us, then we should dare to defy him, and refuse to accept the
everlasting insult latent in the one-sided importunity of a slave. And
this is what the Baül says--he who, in the world of men, goes about
singing for alms from door to door, with his one-stringed instrument
and long robe of patched-up rags on his back:

    I stop and sit here on the road. Do not ask me to walk farther.
    If your love can be complete without mine, let me turn back
        from seeing you.
    I have been travelling to seek you, my friend, for long;
    Yet I refuse to beg a sight of you, if you do not feel my need.
    I am blind with market dust and midday glare,
        and so wait, my heart's lover, in hopes that your own love
          will send you to find me out.

The poet is fully conscious that his value in the world's market is
pitifully small; that he is neither wealthy nor learned. Yet he has
his great compensation, for he has come close to his Lover's heart. In
Bengal the women bathing in the river often use their overturned water
jars to keep themselves floating when they swim, and the poet uses
this incident for his simile:

    It is lucky that I am an empty vessel,
    For when you swim, I keep floating by your side.
    Your full vessels are left on the empty shore, they are for use;
    But I am carried to the river in your arms, and I dance
        to the rhythm of your heart-throbs and heaving of the waves.

The great distinguished people of the world do not know that these
beggars--deprived of education, honour, and wealth--can, in the pride
of their souls, look down upon them as the unfortunate ones, who are
left on the shore for their worldly uses, but whose life ever misses
the touch of the Lover's arms.

The feeling that man is not a mere casual visitor at the palace-gate
of the world, but the invited guest whose presence is needed to give
the royal banquet its sole meaning, is not confined to any particular
sect in India. Let me quote here some poems from a mediæval poet of
Western India--Jnândâs--whose works are nearly forgotten, and have
become scarce from the very exquisiteness of their excellence. In the
following poem he is addressing God's messenger, who comes to us in
the morning light of our childhood, in the dusk of our day's end, and
in the night's darkness:

    Messenger, morning brought you, habited in gold.
    After sunset, your song wore a tune of ascetic grey,
        and then came night.
    Your message was written in bright letters across the black.
    Why is such splendour about you, to lure the heart of one
        who is nothing?

This is the answer of the messenger:

    Great is the festival hall where you are to be the only guest.
    Therefore the letter to you is written from sky to sky,
    And I, the proud servant, bring the invitation with all ceremony.

And thus the poet knows that the silent rows of stars carry God's own
invitation to the individual soul.

The same poet sings:

    What hast thou come to beg from the beggar, O King of Kings?
    My Kingdom is poor for want of him, my dear one, and I
        wait for him in sorrow.

    How long will you keep him waiting, O wretch,
        who has waited for you for ages in silence and stillness?
    Open your gate, and make this very moment fit for the union.

It is the song of man's pride in the value given to him by Supreme
Love and realised by his own love.

The Vaishnava religion, which has become the popular religion of
India, carries the same message: God's love finding its finality in
man's love. According to it, the lover, man, is the complement of the
Lover, God, in the internal love drama of existence; and God's call
is ever wafted in man's heart in the world-music, drawing him towards
the union. This idea has been expressed in rich elaboration of symbols
verging upon realism. But for these Baüls this idea is direct and
simple, full of the dignified beauty of truth, which shuns all tinsels
of ornament.

The Baül poet, when asked why he had no sect mark on his forehead,
answered in his song that the true colour decoration appears on the
skin of the fruit when its inner core is filled with ripe, sweet
juice; but by artificially smearing it with colour from outside you do
not make it ripe. And he says of his Guru, his teacher, that he is
puzzled to find in which direction he must make salutation. For his
teacher is not one, but many, who, moving on, form a procession of
wayfarers.

Baüls have no temple or image for their worship, and this utter
simplicity is needful for men whose one subject is to realise the
innermost nearness of God. The Baül poet expressly says that if we try
to approach God through the senses we miss him:

    Bring him not into your house as the guest of your eyes;
        but let him come at your heart's invitation.
    Opening your doors to that which is seen only, is to lose it.

Yet, being a poet, he also knows that the objects of sense can reveal
their spiritual meaning only when they are not seen through mere
physical eyes:

    Eyes can see only dust and earth,
    But feel it with your heart, it is pure joy.
    The flowers of delight blossom on all sides, in every form,
        but where is your heart's thread to weave them in a garland?

These Baüls have a philosophy, which they call the philosophy of the
body; but they keep its secret; it is only for the initiated.
Evidently the underlying idea is that the individual's body is itself
the temple, in whose inner mystic shrine the Divine appears before the
soul, and the key to it has to be found from those who know. But as
the key is not for us outsiders, I leave it with the observation that
this mystic philosophy of the body is the outcome of the attempt to
get rid of all the outward shelters which are too costly for people
like themselves. But this human body of ours is made by God's own
hand, from his own love, and even if some men, in the pride of their
superiority, may despise it, God finds his joy in dwelling in others
of yet lower birth. It is a truth easier of discovery by these people
of humble origin than by men of proud estate.

The pride of the Baül beggar is not in his worldly distinction, but in
the distinction that God himself has given to him. He feels himself
like a flute through which God's own breath of love has been breathed:

    My heart is like a flute he has played on.
    If ever it fall into other hands,--
        let him fling it away.
    My lover's flute is dear to him.
    Therefore, if to-day alien breath have entered it and
        sounded strange notes,
    Let him break it to pieces and strew the dust with them.

So we find that this man also has his disgust of defilement. While the
ambitious world of wealth and power despises him, he in his turn
thinks that the world's touch desecrates him who has been made sacred
by the touch of his Lover. He does not envy us our life of ambition
and achievements, but he knows how precious his own life has been:

    I am poured forth in living notes of joy and sorrow by your breath.
    Morning and evening, in summer and in rains, I am fashioned to music.
    Yet should I be wholly spent in some flight of song,
    I shall not grieve, the tune is so precious to me.

Our joys and sorrows are contradictory when self separates them in
opposition. But for the heart in which self merges in God's love,
they lose their absoluteness. So the Baül's prayer is to feel in all
situations--in danger, or pain, or sorrow--that he is in God's hands.
He solves the problem of emancipation from sufferings by accepting and
setting them in a higher context:

    I am the boat, you are the sea, and also the boatman.
    Though you never make the shore, though you let me sink,
         why should I be foolish and afraid?
    Is the reaching the shore a greater prize than losing myself
         with you?
    If you are only the haven, as they say, then what is the sea?
    Let it surge and toss me on its waves, I shall be content.
    I live in you, whatever and however you appear.
    Save me or kill me as you wish, only never leave me in
         others' hands.


                                  III

It is needless to say, before I conclude, that I had neither the
training nor the opportunity to study this mendicant religious sect in
Bengal from an ethnological standpoint. I was attracted to find out
how the living currents of religious movements work in the heart of
the people, saving them from degradation imposed by the society of the
learned, of the rich, or of the high-born; how the spirit of man, by
making use even of its obstacles, reaches fulfilment, led thither, not
by the learned authorities in the scriptures, or by the mechanical
impulse of the dogma-driven crowd, but by the unsophisticated
aspiration of the loving soul. On the inaccessible mountain peaks of
theology the snows of creed remain eternally rigid, cold, and pure.
But God's manifest shower falls direct on the plain of humble hearts,
flowing there in various channels, even getting mixed with some mud in
its course, as it is soaked into the underground currents, invisible,
but ever-moving.

I can think of nothing better than to conclude my paper with a poem of
Jnândâs, in which the aspiration of all simple spirits has found a
devout expression:

    I had travelled all day and was tired; then I bowed my head
          towards thy kingly court still far away.
    The night deepened, a longing burned in my heart.
    Whatever the words I sang, pain cried through them--for
          even my songs thirsted--
      O my Lover, my Beloved, my Best in all the world.

    When time seemed lost in darkness,
        thy hand dropped its sceptre to take up the lute and
          strike the uttermost chords;
    And my heart sang out,
      O my Lover, my Beloved, my Best in all the world.

    Ah, who is this whose arms enfold me?
    Whatever I have to leave, let me leave; and whatever I
          have to bear, let me bear.
    Only let me walk with thee,
      O my Lover, my Beloved, my Best in all the world.
    Descend at whiles from thy high audience hall, come down
          amid joys and sorrows.
    Hide in all forms and delights, in love,
    And in my heart sing thy songs,--
      O my Lover, my Beloved, my Best in all the world.




                             EAST AND WEST

                                   I


It is not always a profound interest in man that carries travellers
nowadays to distant lands. More often it is the facility for rapid
movement. For lack of time and for the sake of convenience we
generalise and crush our human facts into the packages within the
steel trunks that hold our travellers' reports.

Our knowledge of our own countrymen and our feelings about them have
slowly and unconsciously grown out of innumerable facts which are full
of contradictions and subject to incessant change. They have the
elusive mystery and fluidity of life. We cannot define to ourselves
what we are as a whole, because we know too much; because our
knowledge is more than knowledge. It is an immediate consciousness of
personality, any evaluation of which carries some emotion, joy or
sorrow, shame or exaltation. But in a foreign land we try to find our
compensation for the meagreness of our data by the compactness of the
generalisation which our imperfect sympathy itself helps us to form.
When a stranger from the West travels in the Eastern world he takes
the facts that displease him and readily makes use of them for his
rigid conclusions, fixed upon the unchallengeable authority of his
personal experience. It is like a man who has his own boat for
crossing his village stream, but, on being compelled to wade across
some strange watercourse, draws angry comparisons as he goes from
every patch of mud and every pebble which his feet encounter.

Our mind has faculties which are universal, but its habits are
insular. There are men who become impatient and angry at the least
discomfort when their habits are incommoded. In their idea of the next
world they probably conjure up the ghosts of their slippers and
dressing-gowns, and expect the latchkey that opens their lodging-house
door on earth to fit their front door in the other world. As
travellers they are a failure; for they have grown too accustomed to
their mental easy-chairs, and in their intellectual nature love home
comforts, which are of local make, more than the realities of life,
which, like earth itself, are full of ups and downs, yet are one in
their rounded completeness.

The modern age has brought the geography of the earth near to us, but
made it difficult for us to come into touch with man. We go to strange
lands and observe; we do not live there. We hardly meet men: but only
specimens of knowledge. We are in haste to seek for general types and
overlook individuals.

When we fall into the habit of neglecting to use the understanding
that comes of sympathy in our travels, our knowledge of foreign people
grows insensitive, and therefore easily becomes both unjust and cruel
in its character, and also selfish and contemptuous in its
application. Such has, too often, been the case with regard to the
meeting of Western people in our days with others for whom they do not
recognise any obligation of kinship.

It has been admitted that the dealings between different races of men
are not merely between individuals; that our mutual understanding is
either aided, or else obstructed, by the general emanations forming
the social atmosphere. These emanations are our collective ideas and
collective feelings, generated according to special historical
circumstances.

For instance, the caste-idea is a collective idea in India. When we
approach an Indian who is under the influence of this collective idea,
he is no longer a pure individual with his conscience fully awake to
the judging of the value of a human being. He is more or less a
passive medium for giving expression to the sentiment of a whole
community.

It is evident that the caste-idea is not creative; it is merely
institutional. It adjusts human beings according to some mechanical
arrangement. It emphasises the negative side of the individual--his
separateness. It hurts the complete truth in man.

In the West, also, the people have a certain collective idea that
obscures their humanity. Let me try to explain what I feel about it.


                                  II

Lately I went to visit some battlefields of France which had been
devastated by war. The awful calm of desolation, which still bore
wrinkles of pain--death-struggles stiffened into ugly ridges--brought
before my mind the vision of a huge demon, which had no shape, no
meaning, yet had two arms that could strike and break and tear, a
gaping mouth that could devour, and bulging brains that could conspire
and plan. It was a purpose, which had a living body, but no complete
humanity to temper it. Because it was passion--belonging to life, and
yet not having the wholeness of life--it was the most terrible of
life's enemies.

Something of the same sense of oppression in a different degree, the
same desolation in a different aspect, is produced in my mind when I
realise the effect of the West upon Eastern life--the West which, in
its relation to us, is all plan and purpose incarnate, without any
superfluous humanity.

I feel the contrast very strongly in Japan. In that country the old
world presents itself with some ideal of perfection, in which man has
his varied opportunities of self-revelation in art, in ceremonial, in
religious faith, and in customs expressing the poetry of social
relationship. There one feels that deep delight of hospitality which
life offers to life. And side by side, in the same soil, stands the
modern world, which is stupendously big and powerful, but
inhospitable. It has no simple-hearted welcome for man. It is living;
yet the incompleteness of life's ideal within it cannot but hurt
humanity.

The wriggling tentacles of a cold-blooded utilitarianism, with which
the West has grasped all the easily yielding succulent portions of the
East, are causing pain and indignation throughout the Eastern
countries. The West comes to us, not with the imagination and sympathy
that create and unite, but with a shock of passion--passion for power
and wealth. This passion is a mere force, which has in it the
principle of separation, of conflict.

I have been fortunate in coming into close touch with individual men
and women of the Western countries, and have felt with them their
sorrows and shared their aspirations. I have known that they seek the
same God, who is my God--even those who deny Him. I feel certain that,
if the great light of culture be extinct in Europe, our horizon in the
East will mourn in darkness. It does not hurt my pride to acknowledge
that, in the present age, Western humanity has received its mission to
be the teacher of the world; that her science, through the mastery of
laws of nature, is to liberate human souls from the dark dungeon of
matter. For this very reason I have realised all the more strongly,
on the other hand, that the dominant collective idea in the Western
countries is not creative. It is ready to enslave or kill individuals,
to drug a great people with soul-killing poison, darkening their whole
future with the black mist of stupefaction, and emasculating entire
races of men to the utmost degree of helplessness. It is wholly
wanting in spiritual power to blend and harmonise; it lacks the sense
of the great personality of man.

The most significant fact of modern days is this, that the West has
met the East. Such a momentous meeting of humanity, in order to be
fruitful, must have in its heart some great emotional idea, generous
and creative. There can be no doubt that God's choice has fallen upon
the knights-errant of the West for the service of the present age;
arms and armour have been given to them; but have they yet realised in
their hearts the single-minded loyalty to their cause which can resist
all temptations of bribery from the devil? The world to-day is offered
to the West. She will destroy it, if she does not use it for a great
creation of man. The materials for such a creation are in the hands of
science; but the creative genius is in Man's spiritual ideal.


                                  III

When I was young a stranger from Europe came to Bengal. He chose his
lodging among the people of the country, shared with them their frugal
diet, and freely offered them his service. He found employment in the
houses of the rich, teaching them French and German, and the money
thus earned he spent to help poor students in buying books. This meant
for him hours of walking in the mid-day heat of a tropical summer;
for, intent upon exercising the utmost economy, he refused to hire
conveyances. He was pitiless in his exaction from himself of his
resources, in money, time, and strength, to the point of privation;
and all this for the sake of a people who were obscure, to whom he was
not born, yet whom he dearly loved. He did not come to us with a
professional mission of teaching sectarian creeds; he had not in his
nature the least trace of that self-sufficiency of goodness, which
humiliates by gifts the victims of its insolent benevolence. Though he
did not know our language, he took every occasion to frequent our
meetings and ceremonies; yet he was always afraid of intrusion, and
tenderly anxious lest he might offend us by his ignorance of our
customs. At last, under the continual strain of work in an alien
climate and surroundings, his health broke down. He died, and was
cremated at our burning-ground, according to his express desire.

The attitude of his mind, the manner of his living, the object of his
life, his modesty, his unstinted self-sacrifice for a people who had
not even the power to give publicity to any benefaction bestowed upon
them, were so utterly unlike anything we were accustomed to associate
with the Europeans in India, that it gave rise in our mind to a
feeling of love bordering upon awe.

We all have a realm, a private paradise, in our mind, where dwell
deathless memories of persons who brought some divine light to our
life's experience, who may not be known to others, and whose names
have no place in the pages of history. Let me confess to you that this
man lives as one of those immortals in the paradise of my individual
life.

He came from Sweden, his name was Hammargren. What was most remarkable
in the event of his coming to us in Bengal was the fact that in his
own country he had chanced to read some works of my great countryman,
Ram Mohan Roy, and felt an immense veneration for his genius and his
character. Ram Mohan Roy lived in the beginning of the last century,
and it is no exaggeration when I describe him as one of the immortal
personalities of modern time. This young Swede had the unusual gift of
a far-sighted intellect and sympathy, which enabled him even from his
distance of space and time, and in spite of racial differences, to
realise the greatness of Ram Mohan Roy. It moved him so deeply that he
resolved to go to the country which produced this great man, and offer
her his service. He was poor, and he had to wait some time in England
before he could earn his passage money to India. There he came at
last, and in reckless generosity of love utterly spent himself to the
last breath of his life, away from home and kindred and all the
inheritances of his motherland. His stay among us was too short to
produce any outward result. He failed even to achieve during his life
what he had in his mind, which was to found by the help of his scanty
earnings a library as a memorial to Ram Mohan Roy, and thus to leave
behind him a visible symbol of his devotion. But what I prize most in
this European youth, who left no record of his life behind him, is not
the memory of any service of goodwill, but the precious gift of
respect which he offered to a people who are fallen upon evil times,
and whom it is so easy to ignore or to humiliate. For the first time
in the modern days this obscure individual from Sweden brought to our
country the chivalrous courtesy of the West, a greeting of human
fellowship.

The coincidence came to me with a great and delightful surprise when
the Nobel Prize was offered to me from Sweden. As a recognition of
individual merit it was of great value to me, no doubt; but it was the
acknowledgment of the East as a collaborator with the Western
continents, in contributing its riches to the common stock of
civilisation, which had the chief significance for the present age. It
meant joining hands in comradeship by the two great hemispheres of the
human world across the sea.


                                  IV

To-day the real East remains unexplored. The blindness of contempt is
more hopeless than the blindness of ignorance; for contempt kills the
light which ignorance merely leaves unignited. The East is waiting to
be understood by the Western races, in order not only to be able to
give what is true in her, but also to be confident of her own mission.

In Indian history, the meeting of the Mussulman and the Hindu produced
Akbar, the object of whose dream was the unification of hearts and
ideals. It had all the glowing enthusiasm of a religion, and it
produced an immediate and a vast result even in his own lifetime.

But the fact still remains that the Western mind, after centuries of
contact with the East, has not evolved the enthusiasm of a chivalrous
ideal which can bring this age to its fulfilment. It is everywhere
raising thorny hedges of exclusion and offering human sacrifices to
national self-seeking. It has intensified the mutual feelings of envy
among Western races themselves, as they fight over their spoils and
display a carnivorous pride in their snarling rows of teeth.

We must again guard our minds from any encroaching distrust of the
individuals of a nation. The active love of humanity and the spirit of
martyrdom for the cause of justice and truth which I have met with in
the Western countries have been a great lesson and inspiration to me.
I have no doubt in my mind that the West owes its true greatness, not
so much to its marvellous training of intellect, as to its spirit of
service devoted to the welfare of man. Therefore I speak with a
personal feeling of pain and sadness about the collective power which
is guiding the helm of Western civilisation. It is a passion, not an
ideal. The more success it has brought to Europe, the more costly it
will prove to her at last, when the accounts have to be rendered. And
the signs are unmistakable, that the accounts have been called for.
The time has come when Europe must know that the forcible parasitism
which she has been practising upon the two large Continents of the
world--the two most unwieldy whales of humanity--must be causing to
her moral nature a gradual atrophy and degeneration.

As an example, let me quote the following extract from the concluding
chapter of _From the Cape to Cairo_, by Messrs. Grogan and Sharp, two
writers who have the power to inculcate their doctrines by precept and
example. In their reference to the African they are candid, as when
they say, "We have stolen his land. Now we must steal his limbs."
These two sentences, carefully articulated, with a smack of
enjoyment, have been more clearly explained in the following
statement, where some sense of that decency which is the attenuated
ghost of a buried conscience, prompts the writers to use the phrase
"compulsory labour" in place of the honest word "slavery"; just as the
modern politician adroitly avoids the word "injunction" and uses the
word "mandate." "Compulsory labour in some form," they say, "is the
corollary of our occupation of the country." And they add: "It is
pathetic, but it is history," implying thereby that moral sentiments
have no serious effect in the history of human beings.

Elsewhere they write: "Either we must give up the country
commercially, or we must make the African work. And mere abuse of
those who point out the impasse cannot change the facts. We must
decide, and soon. Or rather the white man of South Africa will
decide." The authors also confess that they have seen too much of the
world "to have any lingering belief that Western civilisation benefits
native races."

The logic is simple--the logic of egoism. But the argument is
simplified by lopping off the greater part of the premise. For these
writers seem to hold that the only important question for the white
men of South Africa is, how indefinitely to grow fat on ostrich
feathers and diamond mines, and dance jazz dances over the misery and
degradation of a whole race of fellow-beings of a different colour
from their own. Possibly they believe that moral laws have a special
domesticated breed of comfortable concessions for the service of the
people in power. Possibly they ignore the fact that commercial and
political cannibalism, profitably practised upon foreign races, creeps
back nearer home; that the cultivation of unwholesome appetites has
its final reckoning with the stomach which has been made to serve it.
For, after all, man is a spiritual being, and not a mere living
money-bag jumping from profit to profit, and breaking the backbone of
human races in its financial leapfrog.

Such, however, has been the condition of things for more than a
century; and to-day, trying to read the future by the light of the
European conflagration, we are asking ourselves everywhere in the
East: "Is this frightfully overgrown power really great? It can bruise
us from without, but can it add to our wealth of spirit? It can sign
peace treaties, but can it give peace?"

It was about two thousand years ago that all-powerful Rome in one of
its eastern provinces executed on a cross a simple teacher of an
obscure tribe of fishermen. On that day the Roman governor felt no
falling off of his appetite or sleep. On that day there was, on the
one hand, the agony, the humiliation, the death; on the other, the
pomp of pride and festivity in the Governor's palace.

And to-day? To whom, then, shall we bow the head?

    Kasmai devaya havisha vidhema?

    (To which God shall we offer oblation?)

We know of an instance in our own history of India, when a great
personality, both in his life and voice, struck the keynote of the
solemn music of the soul--love for all creatures. And that music
crossed seas, mountains, and deserts. Races belonging to different
climates, habits, and languages were drawn together, not in the clash
of arms, not in the conflict of exploitation, but in harmony of life,
in amity and peace. That was creation.

When we think of it, we see at once what the confusion of thought was
to which the Western poet, dwelling upon the difference between East
and West, referred when he said, "Never the twain shall meet." It is
true that they are not yet showing any real sign of meeting. But the
reason is because the West has not sent out its humanity to meet the
man in the East, but only its machine. Therefore the poet's line has
to be changed into something like this:

    Man is man, machine is machine,
    And never the twain shall wed.

You must know that red tape can never be a common human bond; that
official sealing-wax can never provide means of mutual attachment;
that it is a painful ordeal for human beings to have to receive
favours from animated pigeonholes, and condescensions from printed
circulars that give notice but never speak. The presence of the
Western people in the East is a human fact. If we are to gain anything
from them, it must not be a mere sum-total of legal codes and systems
of civil and military services. Man is a great deal more to man than
that. We have our human birthright to claim direct help from the man
of the West, if he has anything great to give us. It must come to us,
not through mere facts in a juxtaposition, but through the
spontaneous sacrifice made by those who have the gift, and therefore
the responsibility.

Earnestly I ask the poet of the Western world to realise and sing to
you with all the great power of music which he has, that the East and
the West are ever in search of each other, and that they must meet not
merely in the fulness of physical strength, but in fulness of truth;
that the right hand, which wields the sword, has the need of the left,
which holds the shield of safety.

The East has its seat in the vast plains watched over by the
snow-peaked mountains and fertilised by rivers carrying mighty volumes
of water to the sea. There, under the blaze of a tropical sun, the
physical life has bedimmed the light of its vigour and lessened its
claims. There man has had the repose of mind which has ever tried to
set itself in harmony with the inner notes of existence. In the
silence of sunrise and sunset, and on star-crowded nights, he has sat
face to face with the Infinite, waiting for the revelation that opens
up the heart of all that there is. He has said, in a rapture of
realisation:

"Hearken to me, ye children of the Immortal, who dwell in the Kingdom
of Heaven. I have known, from beyond darkness, the Supreme Person,
shining with the radiance of the sun."

The man from the East, with his faith in the eternal, who in his soul
had met the touch of the Supreme Person--did he never come to you in
the West and speak to you of the Kingdom of Heaven? Did he not unite
the East and the West in truth, in the unity of one spiritual bond
between all children of the Immortal, in the realisation of one great
Personality in all human persons?

Yes, the East did once meet the West profoundly in the growth of her
life. Such union became possible, because the East came to the West
with the ideal that is creative, and not with the passion that
destroys moral bonds. The mystic consciousness of the Infinite, which
she brought with her, was greatly needed by the man of the West to
give him his balance.

On the other hand, the East must find her own balance in Science--the
magnificent gift that the West can bring to her. Truth has its nest as
well as its sky. That nest is definite in structure, accurate in law
of construction; and though it has to be changed and rebuilt over and
over again, the need of it is never-ending and its laws are eternal.
For some centuries the East has neglected the nest-building of truth.
She has not been attentive to learn its secret. Trying to cross the
trackless infinite, the East has relied solely upon her wings. She has
spurned the earth, till, buffeted by storms, her wings are hurt and
she is tired, sorely needing help. But has she then to be told that
the messenger of the sky and the builder of the nest shall never
meet?




                            THE MODERN AGE

                                   I


Wherever man meets man in a living relationship, the meeting finds its
natural expression in works of art, the signatures of beauty, in which
the mingling of the personal touch leaves its memorial.

On the other hand, a relationship of pure utility humiliates man--it
ignores the rights and needs of his deeper nature; it feels no
compunction in maltreating and killing things of beauty that can never
be restored.

Some years ago, when I set out from Calcutta on my voyage to Japan,
the first thing that shocked me, with a sense of personal injury, was
the ruthless intrusion of the factories for making gunny-bags on both
banks of the Ganges. The blow it gave to me was owing to the precious
memory of the days of my boyhood, when the scenery of this river was
the only great thing near my birthplace reminding me of the existence
of a world which had its direct communication with our innermost
spirit.

Calcutta is an upstart town with no depth of sentiment in her face and
in her manners. It may truly be said about her genesis:--In the
beginning there was the spirit of the Shop, which uttered through its
megaphone, "Let there be the Office!" and there was Calcutta. She
brought with her no dower of distinction, no majesty of noble or
romantic origin; she never gathered around her any great historical
associations, any annals of brave sufferings, or memory of mighty
deeds. The only thing which gave her the sacred baptism of beauty was
the river. I was fortunate enough to be born before the smoke-belching
iron dragon had devoured the greater part of the life of its banks;
when the landing-stairs descending into its waters, caressed by its
tides, appeared to me like the loving arms of the villages clinging to
it; when Calcutta, with her up-tilted nose and stony stare, had not
completely disowned her foster-mother, rural Bengal, and had not
surrendered body and soul to her wealthy paramour, the spirit of the
ledger, bound in dead leather.

But as an instance of the contrast of the different ideal of a
different age, incarnated in the form of a town, the memory of my last
visit to Benares comes to my mind. What impressed me most deeply,
while I was there, was the mother-call of the river Ganges, ever
filling the atmosphere with an "unheard melody," attracting the whole
population to its bosom every hour of the day. I am proud of the fact
that India has felt a most profound love for this river, which
nourishes civilisation on its banks, guiding its course from the
silence of the hills to the sea with its myriad voices of solitude.
The love of this river, which has become one with the love of the best
in man, has given rise to this town as an expression of reverence.
This is to show that there are sentiments in us which are creative,
which do not clamour for gain, but overflow in gifts, in spontaneous
generosity of self-sacrifice.

But our minds will nevermore cease to be haunted by the perturbed
spirit of the question, "What about gunny-bags?" I admit they are
indispensable, and am willing to allow them a place in society, if my
opponent will only admit that even gunny-bags should have their
limits, and will acknowledge the importance of leisure to man, with
space for joy and worship, and a home of wholesale privacy, with
associations of chaste love and mutual service. If this concession to
humanity be denied or curtailed, and if profit and production are
allowed to run amuck, they will play havoc with our love of beauty, of
truth, of justice, and also with our love for our fellow-beings. So it
comes about that the peasant cultivators of jute, who live on the
brink of everlasting famine, are combined against, and driven to lower
the price of their labours to the point of blank despair, by those who
earn more than cent per cent profit and wallow in the infamy of their
wealth. The facts that man is brave and kind, that he is social and
generous and self-sacrificing, have some aspect of the complete in
them; but the fact that he is a manufacturer of gunny-bags is too
ridiculously small to claim the right of reducing his higher nature to
insignificance. The fragmentariness of utility should never forget its
subordinate position in human affairs. It must not be permitted to
occupy more than its legitimate place and power in society, nor to
have the liberty to desecrate the poetry of life, to deaden our
sensitiveness to ideals, bragging of its own coarseness as a sign of
virility. The pity is that when in the centre of our activities we
acknowledge, by some proud name, the supremacy of wanton
destructiveness, or production not less wanton, we shut out all the
lights of our souls, and in that darkness our conscience and our
consciousness of shame are hidden, and our love of freedom is killed.

I do not for a moment mean to imply that in any particular period of
history men were free from the disturbance of their lower passions.
Selfishness ever had its share in government and trade. Yet there was
a struggle to maintain a balance of forces in society; and our
passions cherished no delusions about their own rank and value. They
contrived no clever devices to hoodwink our moral nature. For in those
days our intellect was not tempted to put its weight into the balance
on the side of over-greed.

But in recent centuries a devastating change has come over our
mentality with regard to the acquisition of money. Whereas in former
ages men treated it with condescension, even with disrespect, now they
bend their knees to it. That it should be allowed a sufficiently large
place in society, there can be no question; but it becomes an outrage
when it occupies those seats which are specially reserved for the
immortals, by bribing us, tampering with our moral pride, recruiting
the best strength of society in a traitor's campaign against human
ideals, thus disguising, with the help of pomp and pageantry, its true
insignificance. Such a state of things has come to pass because, with
the help of science, the possibilities of profit have suddenly become
immoderate. The whole of the human world, throughout its length and
breadth, has felt the gravitational pull of a giant planet of greed,
with concentric rings of innumerable satellites, causing in our
society a marked deviation from the moral orbit. In former times the
intellectual and spiritual powers of this earth upheld their dignity
of independence and were not giddily rocked on the tides of the money
market. But, as in the last fatal stages of disease, this fatal
influence of money has got into our brain and affected our heart. Like
a usurper, it has occupied the throne of high social ideals, using
every means, by menace and threat, to seize upon the right, and,
tempted by opportunity, presuming to judge it. It has not only science
for its ally, but other forces also that have some semblance of
religion, such as nation-worship and the idealising of organised
selfishness. Its methods are far-reaching and sure. Like the claws of
a tiger's paw, they are softly sheathed. Its massacres are invisible,
because they are fundamental, attacking the very roots of life. Its
plunder is ruthless behind a scientific system of screens, which have
the formal appearance of being open and responsible to inquiries. By
whitewashing its stains it keeps its respectability unblemished. It
makes a liberal use of falsehood in diplomacy, only feeling
embarrassed when its evidence is disclosed by others of the trade. An
unscrupulous system of propaganda paves the way for widespread
misrepresentation. It works up the crowd psychology through regulated
hypnotic doses at repeated intervals, administered in bottles with
moral labels upon them of soothing colours. In fact, man has been able
to make his pursuit of power easier to-day by his art of mitigating
the obstructive forces that come from the higher region of his
humanity. With his cult of power and his idolatry of money he has, in
a great measure, reverted to his primitive barbarism, a barbarism
whose path is lit up by the lurid light of intellect. For barbarism is
the simplicity of a superficial life. It may be bewildering in its
surface adornments and complexities, but it lacks the ideal to impart
to it the depth of moral responsibility.


                                  II

Society suffers from a profound feeling of unhappiness, not so much
when it is in material poverty as when its members are deprived of a
large part of their humanity. This unhappiness goes on smouldering in
the subconscious mind of the community till its life is reduced to
ashes or a sudden combustion is produced. The repressed personality of
man generates an inflammable moral gas deadly in its explosive force.

We have seen in the late war, and also in some of the still more
recent events of history, how human individuals freed from moral and
spiritual bonds find a boisterous joy in a debauchery of destruction.
There is generated a disinterested passion of ravage. Through such
catastrophe we can realise what formidable forces of annihilation are
kept in check in our communities by bonds of social ideas; nay, made
into multitudinous manifestations of beauty and fruitfulness. Thus we
know that evils are, like meteors, stray fragments of life, which need
the attraction of some great ideal in order to be assimilated with the
wholesomeness of creation. The evil forces are literally outlaws;
they only need the control and cadence of spiritual laws to change
them into good. The true goodness is not the negation of badness, it
is in the mastery of it. Goodness is the miracle which turns the
tumult of chaos into a dance of beauty.

In modern society the ideal of wholeness has lost its force. Therefore
its different sections have become detached and resolved into their
elemental character of forces. Labour is a force; so also is Capital;
so are the Government and the People; so are Man and Woman. It is said
that when the forces lying latent in even a handful of dust are
liberated from their bond of unity, they can lift the buildings of a
whole neighbourhood to the height of a mountain. Such disfranchised
forces, irresponsible free-booters, may be useful to us for certain
purposes, but human habitations standing secure on their foundations
are better for us. To own the secret of utilising these forces is a
proud fact for us, but the power of self-control and the
self-dedication of love are truer subjects for the exultation of
mankind. The genii of the Arabian Nights may have in their magic their
lure and fascination for us. But the consciousness of God is of
another order, infinitely more precious in imparting to our minds
ideas of the spiritual power of creation. Yet these genii are abroad
everywhere; and even now, after the late war, their devotees are
getting ready to play further tricks upon humanity by suddenly
spiriting it away to some hill-top of desolation.


                                  III

We know that when, at first, any large body of people in their history
became aware of their unity, they expressed it in some popular symbol
of divinity. For they felt that their combination was not an
arithmetical one; its truth was deeper than the truth of number. They
felt that their community was not a mere agglutination but a creation,
having upon it the living touch of the infinite Person. The
realisation of this truth having been an end in itself, a fulfilment,
it gave meaning to self-sacrifice, to the acceptance even of death.

But our modern education is producing a habit of mind which is ever
weakening in us the spiritual apprehension of truth--the truth of a
person as the ultimate reality of existence. Science has its proper
sphere in analysing this world as a construction, just as grammar has
its legitimate office in analysing the syntax of a poem. But the
world, as a creation, is not a mere construction; it too is more than
a syntax. It is a poem, which we are apt to forget when grammar takes
exclusive hold of our minds.

Upon the loss of this sense of a universal personality, which is
religion, the reign of the machine and of method has been firmly
established, and man, humanly speaking, has been made a homeless
tramp. As nomads, ravenous and restless, the men from the West have
come to us. They have exploited our Eastern humanity for sheer gain of
power. This modern meeting of men has not yet received the blessing of
God. For it has kept us apart, though railway lines are laid far and
wide, and ships are plying from shore to shore to bring us together.

It has been said in the Upanishads:

    Yastu sarvâni bhutâni âtmânyevânupashyati
    Sarva bhuteshu châtmânam na tato vijugupsate.

     (He who sees all things in _âtmâ_, in the infinite spirit,
     and the infinite spirit in all beings, remains no longer
     unrevealed.)

In the modern civilisation, for which an enormous number of men are
used as materials, and human relationships have in a large measure
become utilitarian, man is imperfectly revealed. For man's revelation
does not lie in the fact that he is a power, but that he is a spirit.
The prevalence of the theory which realises the power of the machine
in the universe, and organises men into machines, is like the eruption
of Etna, tremendous in its force, in its outburst of fire and fume;
but its creeping lava covers up human shelters made by the ages, and
its ashes smother life.


                                  IV

The terribly efficient method of repressing personality in the
individuals and the races who have failed to resist it has, in the
present scientific age, spread all over the world; and in consequence
there have appeared signs of a universal disruption which seems not
far off. Faced with the possibility of such a disaster, which is sure
to affect the successful peoples of the world in their intemperate
prosperity, the great Powers of the West are seeking peace, not by
curbing their greed, or by giving up the exclusive advantages which
they have unjustly acquired, but by concentrating their forces for
mutual security.

But can powers find their equilibrium in themselves? Power has to be
made secure not only against power, but also against weakness; for
there lies the peril of its losing balance. The weak are as great a
danger for the strong as quicksands for an elephant. They do not
assist progress because they do not resist; they only drag down. The
people who grow accustomed to wield absolute power over others are apt
to forget that by so doing they generate an unseen force which some
day rends that power into pieces. The dumb fury of the downtrodden
finds its awful support from the universal law of moral balance. The
air which is so thin and unsubstantial gives birth to storms that
nothing can resist. This has been proved in history over and over
again, and stormy forces arising from the revolt of insulted humanity
are openly gathering in the air at the present time.

Yet in the psychology of the strong the lesson is despised and no
count taken of the terribleness of the weak. This is the latent
ignorance that, like an unsuspected worm, burrows under the bulk of
the prosperous. Have we never read of the castle of power, securely
buttressed on all sides, in a moment dissolving in air at the
explosion caused by the weak and outraged besiegers? Politicians
calculate upon the number of mailed hands that are kept on the
sword-hilts: they do not possess the third eye to see the great
invisible hand that clasps in silence the hand of the helpless and
waits its time. The strong form their league by a combination of
powers, driving the weak to form their own league alone with their
God. I know I am crying in the wilderness when I raise the voice of
warning; and while the West is busy with its organisation of a
machine-made peace, it will still continue to nourish by its
iniquities the underground forces of earthquake in the Eastern
Continent. The West seems unconscious that Science, by providing it
with more and more power, is tempting it to suicide and encouraging it
to accept the challenge of the disarmed; it does not know that the
challenge comes from a higher source.

Two prophecies about the world's salvation are cherished in the hearts
of the two great religions of the world. They represent the highest
expectation of man, thereby indicating his faith in a truth which he
instinctively considers as ultimate--the truth of love. These
prophecies have not for their vision the fettering of the world and
reducing it to tameness by means of a close-linked power forged in the
factory of a political steel trust. One of the religions has for its
meditation the image of the Buddha who is to come, Maitreya, the
Buddha of love; and he is to bring peace. The other religion waits for
the coming of Christ. For Christ preached peace when he preached love,
when he preached the oneness of the Father with the brothers who are
many. And this was the truth of peace. Christ never held that peace
was the best policy. For policy is not truth. The calculation of
self-interest can never successfully fight the irrational force of
passion--the passion which is perversion of love, and which can only
be set right by the truth of love. So long as the powers build a
league on the foundation of their desire for safety, secure enjoyment
of gains, consolidation of past injustice, and putting off the
reparation of wrongs, while their fingers still wriggle for greed and
reek of blood, rifts will appear in their union; and in future their
conflicts will take greater force and magnitude. It is political and
commercial egoism which is the evil harbinger of war. By different
combinations it changes its shape and dimensions, but not its nature.
This egoism is still held sacred, and made a religion; and such a
religion, by a mere change of temple, and by new committees of
priests, will never save mankind. We must know that, as, through
science and commerce, the realisation of the unity of the material
world gives us power, so the realisation of the great spiritual Unity
of Man alone can give us peace.




                         THE SPIRIT OF FREEDOM

        (A LETTER FROM NEW YORK TO THE AUTHOR'S OWN COUNTRYMEN)


When freedom is not an inner idea which imparts strength to our
activities and breadth to our creations, when it is merely a thing of
external circumstance, it is like an open space to one who is
blindfolded.

In my recent travels in the West I have felt that out there freedom as
an idea has become feeble and ineffectual. Consequently a spirit of
repression and coercion is fast spreading in the politics and social
relationships of the people.

In the age of monarchy the king lived surrounded by a miasma of
intrigue. At court there was an endless whispering of lies and
calumny, and much plotting and planning among the conspiring courtiers
to manipulate the king as the instrument of their own purposes.

In the present age intrigue plays a wider part, and affects the whole
country. The people are drugged with the hashish of false hopes and
urged to deeds of frightfulness by the goadings of manufactured
panics; their higher feelings are exploited by devious channels of
unctuous hypocrisy, their pockets picked under anæsthetics of
flattery, their very psychology affected by a conspiracy of money and
unscrupulous diplomacy.

In the old order the king was given to understand that he was the
freest individual in the world. A greater semblance of external
freedom, no doubt, he had than other individuals. But they built for
him a gorgeous prison of unreality.

The same thing is happening now with the people of the West. They are
flattered into believing that they are free, and they have the
sovereign power in their hands. But this power is robbed by hosts of
self-seekers, and the horse is captured and stabled because of his
gift of freedom over space. The mob-mind is allowed the enjoyment of
an apparent liberty, while its true freedom is curtailed on every
side. Its thoughts are fashioned according to the plans of organised
interest; in its choosing of ideas and forming of opinions it is
hindered either by some punitive force or by the constant insinuation
of untruths; it is made to dwell in an artificial world of hypnotic
phrases. In fact, the people have become the storehouse of a power
that attracts round it a swarm of adventurers who are secretly
investing its walls to exploit it for their own devices.

Thus it has become more and more evident to me that the ideal of
freedom has grown tenuous in the atmosphere of the West. The mentality
is that of a slave-owning community, with a mutilated multitude of men
tied to its commercial and political treadmill. It is the mentality of
mutual distrust and fear. The appalling scenes of inhumanity and
injustice, which are growing familiar to us, are the outcome of a
psychology that deals with terror. No cruelty can be uglier in its
ferocity than the cruelty of the coward. The people who have
sacrificed their souls to the passion of profit-making and the
drunkenness of power are constantly pursued by phantoms of panic and
suspicion, and therefore they are ruthless even where they are least
afraid of mischances. They become morally incapable of allowing
freedom to others, and in their eagerness to curry favour with the
powerful they not only connive at the injustice done by their own
partners in political gambling, but participate in it. A perpetual
anxiety for the protection of their gains at any cost strikes at the
love of freedom and justice, until at length they are ready to forgo
liberty for themselves and for others.

My experience in the West, where I have realised the immense power of
money and of organised propaganda,--working everywhere behind screens
of camouflage, creating an atmosphere of distrust, timidity, and
antipathy,--has impressed me deeply with the truth that real freedom
is of the mind and spirit; it can never come to us from outside. He
only has freedom who ideally loves freedom himself and is glad to
extend it to others. He who cares to have slaves must chain himself to
them; he who builds walls to create exclusion for others builds walls
across his own freedom; he who distrusts freedom in others loses his
moral right to it. Sooner or later he is lured into the meshes of
physical and moral servility.

Therefore I would urge my own countrymen to ask themselves if the
freedom to which they aspire is one of external conditions. Is it
merely a transferable commodity? Have they acquired a true love of
freedom? Have they faith in it? Are they ready to make space in their
society for the minds of their children to grow up in the ideal of
human dignity, unhindered by restrictions that are unjust and
irrational?

Have we not made elaborately permanent the walls of our social
compartments? We are tenaciously proud of their exclusiveness. We
boast that, in this world, no other society but our own has come to
finality in the classifying of its living members. Yet in our
political agitations we conveniently forget that any unnaturalness in
the relationship of governors and governed which humiliates us,
becomes an outrage when it is artificially fixed under the threat of
military persecution.

When India gave voice to immortal thoughts, in the time of fullest
vigour of vitality, her children had the fearless spirit of the
seekers of truth. The great epic of the soul of our people--the
_Mahâbhârata_--gives us a wonderful vision of an overflowing life,
full of the freedom of inquiry and experiment. When the age of the
Buddha came, humanity was stirred in our country to its uttermost
depth. The freedom of mind which it produced expressed itself in a
wealth of creation, spreading everywhere in its richness over the
continent of Asia. But with the ebb of life in India the spirit of
creation died away. It hardened into an age of inert construction. The
organic unity of a varied and elastic society gave way to a
conventional order which proved its artificial character by its
inexorable law of exclusion.

Life has its inequalities, I admit, but they are natural and are in
harmony with our vital functions. The head keeps its place apart from
the feet, not through some external arrangement or any conspiracy of
coercion. If the body is compelled to turn somersaults for an
indefinite period, the head never exchanges its relative function for
that of the feet. But have our social divisions the same
inevitableness of organic law? If we have the hardihood to say "yes"
to that question, then how can we blame an alien people for subjecting
us to a political order which they are tempted to believe eternal?

By squeezing human beings in the grip of an inelastic system and
forcibly holding them fixed, we have ignored the laws of life and
growth. We have forced living souls into a permanent passivity, making
them incapable of moulding circumstance to their own intrinsic design,
and of mastering their own destiny. Borrowing our ideal of life from a
dark period of our degeneracy, we have covered up our sensitiveness
of soul under the immovable weight of a remote past. We have set up an
elaborate ceremonial of cage-worship, and plucked all the feathers
from the wings of the living spirit of our people. And for us,--with
our centuries of degradation and insult, with the amorphousness of our
national unity, with our helplessness before the attack of disasters
from without and our unreasoning self-obstructions from within,--the
punishment has been terrible. Our stupefaction has become so absolute
that we do not even realise that this persistent misfortune, dogging
our steps for ages, cannot be a mere accident of history, removable
only by another accident from outside.

Unless we have true faith in freedom, knowing it to be creative,
manfully taking all its risks, not only do we lose the right to claim
freedom in politics, but we also lack the power to maintain it with
all our strength. For that would be like assigning the service of God
to a confirmed atheist. And men, who contemptuously treat their own
brothers and sisters as eternal babies, never to be trusted in the
most trivial details of their personal life,--coercing them at every
step by the cruel threat of persecution into following a blind lane
leading to nowhere, driving a number of them into hypocrisy and into
moral inertia,--will fail over and over again to rise to the height of
their true and severe responsibility. They will be incapable of
holding a just freedom in politics, and of fighting in freedom's
cause.

The civilisation of the West has in it the spirit of the machine which
must move; and to that blind movement human lives are offered as fuel,
keeping up the steam-power. It represents the active aspect of inertia
which has the appearance of freedom, but not its truth, and therefore
gives rise to slavery both within its boundaries and outside. The
present civilisation of India has the constraining power of the mould.
It squeezes living man in the grip of rigid regulations, and its
repression of individual freedom makes it only too easy for men to be
forced into submission of all kinds and degrees. In both of these
traditions life is offered up to something which is not life; it is a
sacrifice, which has no God for its worship, and is therefore utterly
in vain. The West is continually producing mechanical power in excess
of its spiritual control, and India has produced a system of
mechanical control in excess of its vitality.




                              THE NATION


The peoples are living beings. They have their distinct personalities.
But nations are organisations of power, and therefore their inner
aspects and outward expressions are everywhere monotonously the same.
Their differences are merely differences in degree of efficiency.

In the modern world the fight is going on between the living spirit of
the people and the methods of nation-organising. It is like the
struggle that began in Central Asia between cultivated areas of man's
habitation and the continually encroaching desert sands, till the
human region of life and beauty was choked out of existence. When the
spread of higher ideals of humanity is not held to be important, the
hardening method of national efficiency gains a certain strength; and
for some limited period of time, at least, it proudly asserts itself
as the fittest to survive. But it is the survival of that part of man
which is the least living. And this is the reason why dead monotony is
the sign of the spread of the Nation. The modern towns, which present
the physiognomy due to this dominance of the Nation, are everywhere
the same, from San Francisco to London, from London to Tokyo. They
show no faces, but merely masks.

The peoples, being living personalities, must have their
self-expression, and this leads to their distinctive creations. These
creations are literature, art, social symbols and ceremonials. They
are like different dishes at one common feast. They add richness to
our enjoyment and understanding of truth. They are making the world of
man fertile of life and variedly beautiful.

But the nations do not create, they merely produce and destroy.
Organisations for production are necessary. Even organisations for
destruction may be so. But when, actuated by greed and hatred, they
crowd away into a corner the living man who creates, then the harmony
is lost, and the people's history runs at a break-neck speed towards
some fatal catastrophe.

Humanity, where it is living, is guided by inner ideals; but where it
is a dead organisation it becomes impervious to them. Its building
process is only an external process, and in its response to the moral
guidance it has to pass through obstacles that are gross and
non-plastic.

Man as a person has his individuality, which is the field where his
spirit has its freedom to express itself and to grow. The professional
man carries a rigid crust around him which has very little variation
and hardly any elasticity. This professionalism is the region where
men specialise their knowledge and organise their power, mercilessly
elbowing each other in their struggle to come to the front.
Professionalism is necessary, without doubt; but it must not be
allowed to exceed its healthy limits, to assume complete mastery over
the personal man, making him narrow and hard, exclusively intent upon
pursuit of success at the cost of his faith in ideals.

In ancient India professions were kept within limits by social
regulation. They were considered primarily as social necessities, and
in the second place as the means of livelihood for individuals. Thus
man, being free from the constant urging of unbounded competition,
could have leisure to cultivate his nature in its completeness.

The Cult of the Nation is the professionalism of the people. This cult
is becoming their greatest danger, because it is bringing them
enormous success, making them impatient of the claims of higher
ideals. The greater the amount of success, the stronger are the
conflicts of interest and jealousy and hatred which are aroused in
men's minds, thereby making it more and more necessary for other
peoples, who are still living, to stiffen into nations. With the
growth of nationalism, man has become the greatest menace to man.
Therefore the continual presence of panic goads that very nationalism
into ever-increasing menace.

Crowd psychology is a blind force. Like steam and other physical
forces, it can be utilised for creating a tremendous amount of power.
And therefore rulers of men, who, out of greed and fear, are bent upon
turning their peoples into machines of power, try to train this crowd
psychology for their special purposes. They hold it to be their duty
to foster in the popular mind universal panic, unreasoning pride in
their own race, and hatred of others. Newspapers, school-books, and
even religious services are made use of for this object; and those
who have the courage to express their disapprobation of this blind and
impious cult are either punished in the law-courts, or are socially
ostracised. The individual thinks, even when he feels; but the same
individual, when he feels with the crowd, does not reason at all. His
moral sense becomes blurred. This suppression of higher humanity in
crowd minds is productive of enormous strength. For the crowd mind is
essentially primitive; its forces are elemental. Therefore the Nation
is for ever watching to take advantage of this enormous power of
darkness.

The people's instinct of self-preservation has been made dominant at
particular times of crisis. Then, for the time being, the
consciousness of its solidarity becomes aggressively wide-awake. But
in the Nation this hyper-consciousness is kept alive for all time by
artificial means. A man has to act the part of a policeman when he
finds his house invaded by burglars. But if that remains his normal
condition, then his consciousness of his household becomes acute and
over-wrought, making him fly at every stranger passing near his house.
This intensity of self-consciousness is nothing of which a man should
feel proud; certainly it is not healthful. In like manner, incessant
self-consciousness in a nation is highly injurious for the people. It
serves its immediate purpose, but at the cost of the eternal in man.

When a whole body of men train themselves for a particular narrow
purpose, it becomes a common interest with them to keep up that
purpose and preach absolute loyalty to it. Nationalism is the training
of a whole people for a narrow ideal; and when it gets hold of their
minds it is sure to lead them to moral degeneracy and intellectual
blindness. We cannot but hold firm the faith that this Age of
Nationalism, of gigantic vanity and selfishness, is only a passing
phase in civilisation, and those who are making permanent arrangements
for accommodating this temporary mood of history will be unable to fit
themselves for the coming age, when the true spirit of freedom will
have sway.

With the unchecked growth of Nationalism the moral foundation of man's
civilisation is unconsciously undergoing a change. The ideal of the
social man is unselfishness, but the ideal of the Nation, like that of
the professional man, is selfishness. This is why selfishness in the
individual is condemned, while in the nation it is extolled, which
leads to hopeless moral blindness, confusing the religion of the
people with the religion of the nation. Therefore, to take an example,
we find men more and more convinced of the superior claims of
Christianity, merely because Christian nations are in possession of
the greater part of the world. It is like supporting a robber's
religion by quoting the amount of his stolen property. Nations
celebrate their successful massacre of men in their churches. They
forget that Thugs also ascribed their success in manslaughter to the
favour of their goddess. But in the case of the latter their goddess
frankly represented the principle of destruction. It was the criminal
tribe's own murderous instinct deified--the instinct, not of one
individual, but of the whole community, and therefore held sacred. In
the same manner, in modern churches, selfishness, hatred and vanity in
their collective aspect of national instincts do not scruple to share
the homage paid to God.

Of course, pursuit of self-interest need not be wholly selfish; it can
even be in harmony with the interest of all. Therefore, ideally
speaking, the nationalism, which stands for the expression of the
collective self-interest of a people, need not be ashamed of itself
if it maintains its true limitations. But what we see in practice is,
that every nation which has prospered has done so through its career
of aggressive selfishness either in commercial adventures or in
foreign possessions, or in both. And this material prosperity not only
feeds continually the selfish instincts of the people, but impresses
men's minds with the lesson that, for a nation, selfishness is a
necessity and therefore a virtue. It is the emphasis laid in Europe
upon the idea of the Nation's constant increase of power, which is
becoming the greatest danger to man, both in its direct activity and
its power of infection.

We must admit that evils there are in human nature, in spite of our
faith in moral laws and our training in self-control. But they carry
on their foreheads their own brand of infamy, their very success
adding to their monstrosity. All through man's history there will be
some who suffer, and others who cause suffering. The conquest of evil
will never be a fully accomplished fact, but a continuous process like
the process of burning in a flame.

In former ages, when some particular people became turbulent and tried
to rob others of their human rights, they sometimes achieved success
and sometimes failed. And it amounted to nothing more than that. But
when this idea of the Nation, which has met with universal acceptance
in the present day, tries to pass off the cult of collective
selfishness as a moral duty, simply because that selfishness is
gigantic in stature, it not only commits depredation, but attacks the
very vitals of humanity. It unconsciously generates in people's minds
an attitude of defiance against moral law. For men are taught by
repeated devices the lesson that the Nation is greater than the
people, while yet it scatters to the winds the moral law that the
people have held sacred.

It has been said that a disease becomes most acutely critical when the
brain is affected. For it is the brain that is constantly directing
the siege against all disease forces. The spirit of national
selfishness is that brain disease of a people which shows itself in
red eyes and clenched fists, in violence of talk and movements, all
the while shattering its natural restorative powers. But the power of
self-sacrifice, together with the moral faculty of sympathy and
co-operation, is the guiding spirit of social vitality. Its function
is to maintain a beneficent relation of harmony with its
surroundings. But when it begins to ignore the moral law which is
universal and uses it only within the bounds of its own narrow sphere,
then its strength becomes like the strength of madness which ends in
self-destruction.

What is worse, this aberration of a people, decked with the showy
title of "patriotism," proudly walks abroad, passing itself off as a
highly moral influence. Thus it has spread its inflammatory contagion
all over the world, proclaiming its fever flush to be the best sign of
health. It is causing in the hearts of peoples, naturally inoffensive,
a feeling of envy at not having their temperature as high as that of
their delirious neighbours and not being able to cause as much
mischief, but merely having to suffer from it.

I have often been asked by my Western friends how to cope with this
evil, which has attained such sinister strength and vast dimensions.
In fact, I have often been blamed for merely giving warning, and
offering no alternative. When we suffer as a result of a particular
system, we believe that some other system would bring us better luck.
We are apt to forget that all systems produce evil sooner or later,
when the psychology which is at the root of them is wrong. The system
which is national to-day may assume the shape of the international
to-morrow; but so long as men have not forsaken their idolatry of
primitive instincts and collective passions, the new system will only
become a new instrument of suffering. And because we are trained to
confound efficient system with moral goodness itself, every ruined
system makes us more and more distrustful of moral law.

Therefore I do not put my faith in any new institution, but in the
individuals all over the world who think clearly, feel nobly, and act
rightly, thus becoming the channels of moral truth. Our moral ideals
do not work with chisels and hammers. Like trees, they spread their
roots in the soil and their branches in the sky, without consulting
any architect for their plans.




                            WOMAN AND HOME


Creative expressions attain their perfect form through emotions
modulated. Woman has that expression natural to her--a cadence of
restraint in her behaviour, producing poetry of life. She has been an
inspiration to man, guiding, most often unconsciously, his restless
energy into an immense variety of creations in literature, art, music
and religion. This is why, in India, woman has been described as the
symbol of Shakti, the creative power.

But if woman begins to believe that, though biologically her function
is different from that of man, psychologically she is identical with
him; if the human world in its mentality becomes exclusively male,
then before long it will be reduced to utter inanity. For life finds
its truth and beauty, not in any exaggeration of sameness, but in
harmony.

If woman's nature were identical with man's, if Eve were a mere
tautology of Adam, it would only give rise to a monotonous
superfluity. But that she was not so was proved by the banishment she
secured from a ready-made Paradise. She had the instinctive wisdom to
realise that it was her mission to help her mate in creating a
Paradise of their own on earth, whose ideal she was to supply with her
life, whose materials were to be produced and gathered by her comrade.

However, it is evident that an increasing number of women in the West
are ready to assert that their difference from men is unimportant. The
reason for the vehement utterance of such a paradox cannot be ignored.
It is a rebellion against a necessity, which is not equal for both the
partners.

Love in all forms has its obligations, and the love that binds women
to their children binds them to their homes. But necessity is a
tyrant, making us submit to injury and indignity, allowing advantage
over us to those who are wholly or comparatively free from its burden.
Such has been the case in the social relationship between man and
woman. Along with the difference inherent in their respective natures,
there have grown up between them inequalities fostered by
circumstances. Man is not handicapped by the same biological and
psychological responsibilities as woman, and therefore he has the
liberty to give her the security of home. This liberty exacts payment
when it offers its boon, because to give or to withhold the gift is
within its power. It is the unequal freedom in their mutual
relationships which has made the weight of life's tragedies so
painfully heavy for woman to bear.

Some mitigation of her disadvantage has been effected by her rendering
herself and her home a luxury to man. She has accentuated those
qualities in herself which insidiously impose their bondage over her
mate, some by pandering to his weakness, and some by satisfying his
higher nature, till the sex-consciousness in our society has grown
abnormal and overpowering. There is no actual objection to this in
itself, for it offers a stimulus, acting in the depth of life, which
leads to creative exuberance. But a great deal of it is a forced
growth of compulsion bearing seeds of degradation. In those ages when
men acknowledged spiritual perfection to be their object, women were
denounced as the chief obstacle in their way. The constant and
conscious exercise of allurements, which gave women their power,
attacked the weak spots in man's nature, and by doing so added to its
weakness. For all relationships tainted with repression of freedom
must become sources of degeneracy to the strong who impose such
repression.

Balance of power, however, between man and woman was in a measure
established when home wielded a strong enough attraction to make men
accept its obligations. But at last the time has come when the
material ambition of man has assumed such colossal proportions that
home is in danger of losing its centre of gravity for him, and he is
receding farther and farther from its orbit.

The arid zone in the social life is spreading fast. The simple
comforts of home, made precious by the touch of love, are giving way
to luxuries that can only have their full extension in the isolation
of self-centred life. Hotels are being erected on the ruins of homes;
productions are growing more stupendous than creations; and most men
have, for the materials of their happiness and recreation, their dogs
and horses, their pipes, guns, and gambling clubs.

Reactions and rebellions, not being normal in their character, go on
hurting truth until peace is restored. Therefore, when woman refuses
to acknowledge the distinction between her life and that of man, she
does not convince us of its truth, but only proves to us that she is
suffering. All great sufferings indicate some wrong somewhere. In the
present case, the wrong is in woman's lack of freedom in her
relationship with man, which compels her to turn her disabilities into
attractions, and to use untruths as her allies in the battle of life,
while she is suffering from the precariousness of her position.

From the beginning of our society, women have naturally accepted the
training which imparts to their life and to their home a spirit of
harmony. It is their instinct to perform their services in such a
manner that these, through beauty, might be raised from the domain of
slavery to the realm of grace. Women have tried to prove that in the
building up of social life they are artists and not artisans. But all
expressions of beauty lose their truth when compelled to accept the
patronage of the gross and the indifferent. Therefore when necessity
drives women to fashion their lives to the taste of the insensitive or
the sensual, then the whole thing becomes a tragedy of desecration.
Society is full of such tragedies. Many of the laws and social
regulations guiding the relationships of man and woman are relics of
a barbaric age, when the brutal pride of an exclusive possession had
its dominance in human relations, such as those of parents and
children, husbands and wives, masters and servants, teachers and
disciples. The vulgarity of it still persists in the social bond
between the sexes because of the economic helplessness of woman.
Nothing makes us so stupidly mean as the sense of superiority which
the power of the purse confers upon us.

The powers of muscle and of money have opportunities of immediate
satisfaction, but the power of the ideal must have infinite patience.
The man who sells his goods, or fulfils his contract, is cheated if he
fails to realise payment, but he who gives form to some ideal may
never get his due and be fully paid. What I have felt in the women of
India is the consciousness of this ideal--their simple faith in the
sanctity of devotion lighted by love which is held to be divine. True
womanliness is regarded in our country as the saintliness of love. It
is not merely praised there, but literally worshipped; and she who is
gifted with it is called _Devi_, as one revealing in herself Woman,
the Divine. That this has not been a mere metaphor to us is because,
in India, our mind is familiar with the idea of God in an eternal
feminine aspect. Thus the Eastern woman, who is deeply aware in her
heart of the sacredness of her mission, is a constant education to
man. It has to be admitted that there are chances of such an influence
failing to penetrate the callousness of the coarse-minded; but that is
the destiny of all manifestations whose value is not in success or
reward in honour.

Woman has to be ready to suffer. She cannot allow her emotions to be
dulled or polluted, for these are to create her life's atmosphere,
apart from which her world would be dark and dead. This leaves her
heart without any protection of insensibility, at the mercy of the
hurts and insults of life. Women of India, like women everywhere, have
their share of suffering, but it radiates through the ideal, and
becomes, like sunlight, a creative force in their world. Our women
know by heart the legends of the great women of the epic age--Savitri
who by the power of love conquered death, and Sitâ who had no other
reward for her life of sacrifice but the sacred majesty of sorrow.
They know that it is their duty to make this life an image of the life
eternal, and that love's mission truly performed has a spiritual
meaning. It is a religious responsibility for them to live the life
which is their own. For their activity is not for money-making, or
organising power, or intellectually probing the mystery of existence,
but for establishing and maintaining human relationships requiring the
highest moral qualities. It is the consciousness of the spiritual
character of their life's work, which lifts them above the utilitarian
standard of the immediate and the passing, surrounds them with the
dignity of the eternal, and transmutes their suffering and sorrow into
a crown of light.

I must guard myself from the risk of a possible misunderstanding. The
permanent significance of home is not in the narrowness of its
enclosure, but in an eternal moral idea. It represents the truth of
human relationship; it reveals loyalty and love for the personality of
man. Let us take a wider view, in a perspective truer than can be
found in its present conventional associations. With the discovery and
development of agriculture there came a period of settled life in our
history. The nomad ever moved on with his tents and cattle; he
explored space and exploited its contents. The cultivator of land
explored time in its immensity, for he had leisure. Comparatively
secured from the uncertainty of his outer resources, he had the
opportunity to deal with his moral resources in the realm of human
truth. This is why agricultural civilisation, like that of India and
China, is essentially a civilisation of human relationship, of the
adjustment of mutual obligations. It is deep-rooted in the inner life
of man. Its basis is co-operation and not competition. In other words,
its principle is the principle of home, to which all its outer
adventures are subordinated.

In the meanwhile, the nomadic life with its predatory instinct of
exploitation has developed into a great civilisation. It is immensely
proud and strong, killing leisure and pursuing opportunities. It
minimises the claims of personal relationship and is jealously careful
of its unhampered freedom for acquiring wealth and asserting its will
upon others. Its burden is the burden of things, which grows heavier
and more complex every day, disregarding the human and the spiritual.
Its powerful pressure from all sides narrows the limits of home, the
personal region of the human world. Thus, in this region of life,
women are every day hustled out of their shelter for want of
accommodation.

But such a state of things can never have the effect of changing woman
into man. On the contrary, it will lead her to find her place in the
unlimited range of society, and the Guardian Spirit of the personal in
human nature will extend the ministry of woman over all developments
of life. Habituated to deal with the world as a machine, man is
multiplying his materials, banishing away his happiness and
sacrificing love to comfort, which is an illusion. At last the present
age has sent its cry to woman, asking her to come out from her
segregation in order to restore the spiritual supremacy of all that is
human in the world of humanity. She has been aroused to remember that
womanliness is not chiefly decorative. It is like that vital health,
which not only imparts the bloom of beauty to the body, but joy to the
mind and perfection to life.




                         AN EASTERN UNIVERSITY


In the midst of much that is discouraging in the present state of the
world, there is one symptom of vital promise. Asia is awakening. This
great event, if it be but directed along the right lines, is full of
hope, not only for Asia herself, but for the whole world.

On the other hand, it has to be admitted that the relationship of the
West with the East, growing more and more complex and widespread for
over two centuries, far from attaining its true fulfilment, has given
rise to a universal spirit of conflict. The consequent strain and
unrest have profoundly disturbed Asia, and antipathetic forces have
been accumulating for years in the depth of the Eastern mind.

The meeting of the East and the West has remained incomplete, because
the occasions of it have not been disinterested. The political and
commercial adventures carried on by Western races--very often by
force and against the interest and wishes of the countries they have
dealt with--have created a moral alienation, which is deeply injurious
to both parties. The perils threatened by this unnatural relationship
have long been contemptuously ignored by the West. But the blind
confidence of the strong in their apparent invincibility has often led
them, from their dream of security, into terrible surprises of
history.

It is not the fear of danger or loss to one people or another,
however, which is most important. The demoralising influence of the
constant estrangement between the two hemispheres, which affects the
baser passions of man,--pride, greed and hypocrisy on the one hand;
fear, suspiciousness and flattery on the other,--has been developing,
and threatens us with a world-wide spiritual disaster.

The time has come when we must use all our wisdom to understand the
situation, and to control it, with a stronger trust in moral guidance
than in any array of physical forces.

In the beginning of man's history his first social object was to form
a community, to grow into a people. At that early period, individuals
were gathered together within geographical enclosures. But in the
present age, with its facility of communication, geographical barriers
have almost lost their reality, and the great federation of men, which
is waiting either to find its true scope or to break asunder in a
final catastrophe, is not a meeting of individuals, but of various
human races. Now the problem before us is of one single country, which
is this earth, where the races as individuals must find both their
freedom of self-expression and their bond of federation. Mankind must
realise a unity, wider in range, deeper in sentiment, stronger in
power than ever before. Now that the problem is large, we have to
solve it on a bigger scale, to realise the God in man by a larger
faith and to build the temple of our faith on a sure and world-wide
basis.

The first step towards realisation is to create opportunities for
revealing the different peoples to one another. This can never be done
in those fields where the exploiting utilitarian spirit is supreme. We
must find some meeting-ground, where there can be no question of
conflicting interests. One of such places is the University, where we
can work together in a common pursuit of truth, share together our
common heritage, and realise that artists in all parts of the world
have created forms of beauty, scientists discovered secrets of the
universe, philosophers solved the problems of existence, saints made
the truth of the spiritual world organic in their own lives, not
merely for some particular race to which they belonged, but for all
mankind. When the science of meteorology knows the earth's atmosphere
as continuously one, affecting the different parts of the world
differently, but in a harmony of adjustments, it knows and attains
truth. And so, too, we must know that the great mind of man is one,
working through the many differences which are needed to ensure the
full result of its fundamental unity. When we understand this truth in
a disinterested spirit, it teaches us to respect all the differences
in man that are real, yet remain conscious of our oneness; and to know
that perfection of unity is not in uniformity, but in harmony.

This is the problem of the present age. The East, for its own sake and
for the sake of the world, must not remain unrevealed. The deepest
source of all calamities in history is misunderstanding. For where we
do not understand, we can never be just.

Being strongly impressed with the need and the responsibility, which
every individual to-day must realise according to his power, I have
formed the nucleus of an International University in India, as one of
the best means of promoting mutual understanding between the East and
the West. This Institution, according to the plan I have in mind, will
invite students from the West to study the different systems of Indian
philosophy, literature, art and music in their proper environment,
encouraging them to carry on research work in collaboration with the
scholars already engaged in this task.

India has her renaissance. She is preparing to make her contribution
to the world of the future. In the past she produced her great
culture, and in the present age she has an equally important
contribution to make to the culture of the New World which is emerging
from the wreckage of the Old. This is a momentous period of her
history, pregnant with precious possibilities, when any disinterested
offer of co-operation from any part of the West will have an immense
moral value, the memory of which will become brighter as the
regeneration of the East grows in vigour and creative power.

The Western Universities give their students an opportunity to learn
what all the European peoples have contributed to their Western
culture. Thus the intellectual mind of the West has been luminously
revealed to the world. What is needed to complete this illumination is
for the East to collect its own scattered lamps and offer them to the
enlightenment of the world.

There was a time when the great countries of Asia had, each of them,
to nurture its own civilisation apart in comparative seclusion. Now
has come the age of co-ordination and co-operation. The seedlings that
were reared within narrow plots must now be transplanted into the open
fields. They must pass the test of the world-market, if their maximum
value is to be obtained.

But before Asia is in a position to co-operate with the culture of
Europe, she must base her own structure on a synthesis of all the
different cultures which she has. When, taking her stand on such a
culture, she turns toward the West, she will take, with a confident
sense of mental freedom, her own view of truth, from her own
vantage-ground, and open a new vista of thought to the world.
Otherwise, she will allow her priceless inheritance to crumble into
dust, and, trying to replace it clumsily with feeble imitations of the
West, make herself superfluous, cheap and ludicrous. If she thus
loses her individuality and her specific power to exist, will it in
the least help the rest of the world? Will not her terrible bankruptcy
involve also the Western mind? If the whole world grows at last into
an exaggerated West, then such an illimitable parody of the modern age
will die, crushed beneath its own absurdity.

In this belief, it is my desire to extend by degrees the scope of this
University on simple lines, until it comprehends the whole range of
Eastern cultures--the Aryan, Semitic, Mongolian and others. Its object
will be to reveal the Eastern mind to the world.

Of one thing I felt certain during my travels in Europe, that a
genuine interest has been roused there in the philosophy and the arts
of the East, from which the Western mind seeks fresh inspiration of
truth and beauty. Once the East had her reputation of fabulous wealth,
and the seekers were attracted from across the sea. Since then, the
shrine of wealth has changed its site. But the East is famed also for
her storage of wisdom, harvested by her patriarchs from long
successive ages of spiritual endeavour. And when, as now, in the midst
of the pursuit of power and wealth, there rises the cry of privation
from the famished spirit of man, an opportunity is offered to the East
to offer her store to those who need it.

Once upon a time we were in possession of such a thing as our own mind
in India. It was living. It thought, it felt, it expressed itself. It
was receptive as well as productive. That this mind could be of any
use in the process, or in the end, of our education was overlooked by
our modern educational dispensation. We are provided with buildings
and books and other magnificent burdens calculated to suppress our
mind. The latter was treated like a library-shelf solidly made of
wood, to be loaded with leather-bound volumes of second-hand
information. In consequence, it has lost its own colour and character,
and has borrowed polish from the carpenter's shop. All this has cost
us money, and also our finer ideas, while our intellectual vacancy has
been crammed with what is described in official reports as Education.
In fact, we have bought our spectacles at the expense of our eyesight.

In India our goddess of learning is _Saraswati_. My audience in the
West, I am sure, will be glad to know that her complexion is white.
But the signal fact is that she is living and she is a woman, and her
seat is on a lotus-flower. The symbolic meaning of this is, that she
dwells in the centre of life and the heart of all existence, which
opens itself in beauty to the light of heaven.

The Western education which we have chanced to know is impersonal. Its
complexion is also white, but it is the whiteness of the white-washed
class-room walls. It dwells in the cold-storage compartments of
lessons and the ice-packed minds of the schoolmasters. The effect
which it had on my mind when, as a boy, I was compelled to go to
school, I have described elsewhere. My feeling was very much the same
as a tree might have, which was not allowed to live its full life, but
was cut down to be made into packing-cases.

The introduction of this education was not a part of the solemn
marriage ceremony which was to unite the minds of the East and West in
mutual understanding. It represented an artificial method of training
specially calculated to produce the carriers of the white man's
burden. This want of ideals still clings to our education system,
though our Universities have latterly burdened their syllabus with a
greater number of subjects than before. But it is only like adding to
the bags of wheat the bullock carries to market; it does not make the
bullock any better off.

Mind, when long deprived of its natural food of truth and freedom of
growth, develops an unnatural craving for success; and our students
have fallen victims to the mania for success in examinations. Success
consists in obtaining the largest number of marks with the strictest
economy of knowledge. It is a deliberate cultivation of disloyalty to
truth, of intellectual dishonesty, of a foolish imposition by which
the mind is encouraged to rob itself. But as we are by means of it
made to forget the existence of mind, we are supremely happy at the
result. We pass examinations, and shrivel up into clerks, lawyers and
police inspectors, and we die young.

Universities should never be made into mechanical organisations for
collecting and distributing knowledge. Through them the people should
offer their intellectual hospitality, their wealth of mind to others,
and earn their proud right in return to receive gifts from the rest of
the world. But in the whole length and breadth of India there is not a
single University established in the modern time where a foreign or
an Indian student can properly be acquainted with the best products
of the Indian mind. For that we have to cross the sea, and knock at
the doors of France and Germany. Educational institutions in our
country are India's alms-bowl of knowledge; they lower our
intellectual self-respect; they encourage us to make a foolish display
of decorations composed of borrowed feathers.

This it was that led me to found a school in Bengal, in face of many
difficulties and discouragements, and in spite of my own vocation as a
poet, who finds his true inspiration only when he forgets that he is a
schoolmaster. It is my hope that in this school a nucleus has been
formed, round which an indigenous University of our own land will find
its natural growth--a University which will help India's mind to
concentrate and to be fully conscious of itself; free to seek the
truth and make this truth its own wherever found, to judge by its own
standard, give expression to its own creative genius, and offer its
wisdom to the guests who come from other parts of the world.

Man's intellect has a natural pride in its own aristocracy, which is
the pride of its culture. Culture only acknowledges the excellence
whose criticism is in its inner perfection, not in any external
success. When this pride succumbs to some compulsion of necessity or
lure of material advantage, it brings humiliation to the intellectual
man. Modern India, through her very education, has been made to suffer
this humiliation. Once she herself provided her children with a
culture which was the product of her own ages of thought and creation.
But it has been thrust aside, and we are made to tread the mill of
passing examinations, not for learning anything, but for notifying
that we are qualified for employments under organisations conducted in
English. Our educated community is not a cultured community, but a
community of qualified candidates. Meanwhile the proportion of
possible employments to the number of claimants has gradually been
growing narrower, and the consequent disaffection has been widespread.
At last the very authorities who are responsible for this are blaming
their victims. Such is the perversity of human nature. It bears its
worst grudge against those it has injured.

It is as if some tribe which had the primitive habit of decorating its
tribal members with birds' plumage were some day to hold these very
birds guilty of the crime of being extinct. There are belated
attempts on the part of our governors to read us pious homilies about
disinterested love of learning, while the old machinery goes on
working, whose product is not education but certificates. It is good
to remind the fettered bird that its wings are for soaring; but it is
better to cut the chain which is holding it to its perch. The most
pathetic feature of the tragedy is that the bird itself has learnt to
use its chain for its ornament, simply because the chain jingles in
fairly respectable English.

In the Bengali language there is a modern maxim which can be
translated, "He who learns to read and write rides in a carriage and
pair." In English there is a similar proverb, "Knowledge is power." It
is an offer of a prospective bribe to the student, a promise of an
ulterior reward which is more important than knowledge itself.
Temptations, held before us as inducements to be good or to pursue
uncongenial paths, are most often flimsy lies or half-truths, such as
the oft-quoted maxim of respectable piety, "Honesty is the best
policy," at which politicians all over the world seem to laugh in
their sleeves. But unfortunately, education conducted under a special
providence of purposefulness, of eating the fruit of knowledge from
the wrong end, _does_ lead one to that special paradise on earth, the
daily rides in one's own carriage and pair. And the West, I have heard
from authentic sources, is aspiring in its education after that
special cultivation of worldliness.

Where society is comparatively simple and obstructions are not too
numerous, we can clearly see how the life-process guides education in
its vital purpose. The system of folk-education, which is indigenous
to India, but is dying out, was one with the people's life. It flowed
naturally through the social channels and made its way everywhere. It
is a system of widespread irrigation of culture. Its teachers,
specially trained men, are in constant requisition, and find crowded
meetings in our villages, where they repeat the best thoughts and
express the ideals of the land in the most effective form. The mode of
instruction includes the recitation of epics, expounding of the
scriptures, reading from the Puranas, which are the classical records
of old history, performance of plays founded upon the early myths and
legends, dramatic narration of the lives of ancient heroes, and the
singing in chorus of songs from the old religious literature.
Evidently, according to this system, the best function of education
is to enable us to realise that to live as a man is great, requiring
profound philosophy for its ideal, poetry for its expression, and
heroism in its conduct. Owing to this vital method of culture the
common people of India, though technically illiterate, have been made
conscious of the sanctity of social relationships, entailing constant
sacrifice and self-control, urged and supported by ideals collectively
expressed in one word, _Dharma_.

Such a system of education may sound too simple for the complexities
of modern life. But the fundamental principle of social life in its
different stages of development remains the same; and in no
circumstance can the truth be ignored that all human complexities must
harmonise in organic unity with life, failing which there will be
endless conflict. Most things in the civilised world occupy more than
their legitimate space. Much of their burden is needless. By bearing
this burden civilised man may be showing great strength, but he
displays little skill. To the gods, viewing this from on high, it must
seem like the flounderings of a giant who has got out of his depth and
knows not how to swim.

The main source of all forms of voluntary slavery is the desire of
gain. It is difficult to fight against this when modern civilisation
is tainted with such a universal contamination of avarice. I have
realised it myself in the little boys of my own school. For the first
few years there is no trouble. But as soon as the upper class is
reached, their worldly wisdom--the malady of the aged--begins to
assert itself. They rebelliously insist that they must no longer
learn, but rather pass examinations. Professions in the modern age are
more numerous and lucrative than ever before. They need specialisation
of training and knowledge, tempting education to yield its spiritual
freedom to the claims of utilitarian ambitions. But man's deeper
nature is hurt; his smothered life seeks to be liberated from the
suffocating folds and sensual ties of prosperity. And this is why we
find almost everywhere in the world a growing dissatisfaction with the
prevalent system of teaching, which betrays the encroachment of
senility and worldly prudence over pure intellect.

In India, also, a vague feeling of discontent has given rise to
numerous attempts at establishing national schools and colleges. But,
unfortunately, our very education has been successful in depriving us
of our real initiative and our courage of thought. The training we get
in our schools has the constant implication in it that it is not for
us to produce but to borrow. And we are casting about to borrow our
educational plans from European institutions. The trampled plants of
Indian corn are dreaming of recouping their harvest from the
neighbouring wheat fields. To change the figure, we forget that, for
proficiency in walking, it is better to train the muscles of our own
legs than to strut upon wooden ones of foreign make, although they
clatter and cause more surprise at our skill in using them than if
they were living and real.

But when we go to borrow help from a foreign neighbourhood we are apt
to overlook the real source of help behind all that is external and
apparent. Had the deep-water fishes happened to produce a scientist
who chose the jumping of a monkey for his research work, I am sure he
would give most of the credit to the branches of the trees and very
little to the monkey itself. In a foreign University we see the
branching wildernesses of its buildings, furniture, regulations, and
syllabus, but the monkey, which is a difficult creature to catch and
more difficult to manufacture, we are likely to treat as a mere
accident of minor importance. It is convenient for us to overlook the
fact that among the Europeans the living spirit of the University is
widely spread in their society, their parliament, their literature,
and the numerous activities of their corporate life. In all these
functions they are in perpetual touch with the great personality of
the land which is creative and heroic in its constant acts of
self-expression and self-sacrifice. They have their thoughts published
in their books as well as through the medium of living men who think
those thoughts, and who criticise, compare and disseminate them. Some
at least of the drawbacks of their academic education are redeemed by
the living energy of the intellectual personality pervading their
social organism. It is like the stagnant reservoir of water which
finds its purification in the showers of rain to which it keeps itself
open. But, to our misfortune, we have in India all the furniture of
the European University except the human teacher. We have, instead,
mere purveyors of book-lore in whom the paper god of the bookshop has
been made vocal.

A most important truth, which we are apt to forget, is that a teacher
can never truly teach unless he is still learning himself. A lamp can
never light another lamp unless it continues to burn its own flame.
The teacher who has come to the end of his subject, who has no living
traffic with his knowledge, but merely repeats his lessons to his
students, can only load their minds; he cannot quicken them. Truth not
only must inform but inspire. If the inspiration dies out, and the
information only accumulates, then truth loses its infinity. The
greater part of our learning in the schools has been wasted because,
for most of our teachers, their subjects are like dead specimens of
once living things, with which they have a learned acquaintance, but
no communication of life and love.

The educational institution, therefore, which I have in mind has
primarily for its object the constant pursuit of truth, from which the
imparting of truth naturally follows. It must not be a dead cage in
which living minds are fed with food artificially prepared. It should
be an open house, in which students and teachers are at one. They must
live their complete life together, dominated by a common aspiration
for truth and a need of sharing all the delights of culture. In former
days the great master-craftsmen had students in their workshops where
they co-operated in shaping things to perfection. That was the place
where knowledge could become living--that knowledge which not only has
its substance and law, but its atmosphere subtly informed by a
creative personality. For intellectual knowledge also has its aspect
of creative art, in which the man who explores truth expresses
something which is human in him--his enthusiasm, his courage, his
sacrifice, his honesty, and his skill. In merely academical teaching
we find subjects, but not the man who pursues the subjects; therefore
the vital part of education remains incomplete.

For our Universities we must claim, not labelled packages of truth and
authorised agents to distribute them, but truth in its living
association with her lovers and seekers and discoverers. Also we must
know that the concentration of the mind-forces scattered throughout
the country is the most important mission of a University, which, like
the nucleus of a living cell, should be the centre of the intellectual
life of the people.

The bringing about of an intellectual unity in India is, I am told,
difficult to the verge of impossibility owing to the fact that India
has so many different languages. Such a statement is as unreasonable
as to say that man, because he has a diversity of limbs, should find
it impossible to realise life's unity in himself, and that only an
earthworm composed of a tail and nothing else could truly know that it
had a body.

Let us admit that India is not like any one of the great countries of
Europe, which has its own separate language; but is rather like Europe
herself, branching out into different peoples with many different
languages. And yet Europe has a common civilisation, with an
intellectual unity which is not based upon uniformity of language. It
is true that in the earlier stages of her culture the whole of Europe
had Latin for her learned tongue. That was in her intellectual budding
time, when all her petals of self-expression were closed in one point.
But the perfection of her mental unfolding was not represented by the
singularity of her literary vehicle. When the great European countries
found their individual languages, then only the true federation of
cultures became possible in the West, and the very differences of the
channels made the commerce of ideas in Europe so richly copious and so
variedly active. We can well imagine what the loss to European
civilisation would be if France, Italy and Germany, and England
herself, had not through their separate agencies contributed to the
common coffer their individual earnings.

There was a time with us when India had her common language of culture
in Sanskrit. But, for the complete commerce of her thought, she
required that all her vernaculars should attain their perfect powers,
through which her different peoples might manifest their
idiosyncrasies; and this could never be done through a foreign tongue.

In the United States, in Canada and other British Colonies, the
language of the people is English. It has a great literature which had
its birth and growth in the history of the British Islands. But when
this language, with all its products and acquisitions, matured by ages
on its own mother soil, is carried into foreign lands, which have
their own separate history and their own life-growth, it must
constantly hamper the indigenous growth of culture and destroy
individuality of judgement and the perfect freedom of self-expression.
The inherited wealth of the English language, with all its splendour,
becomes an impediment when taken into different surroundings, just as
when lungs are given to the whale in the sea. If such is the case even
with races whose grandmother-tongue naturally continues to be their
own mother-tongue, one can imagine what sterility it means for a
people which accepts, for its vehicle of culture, an altogether
foreign language. A language is not like an umbrella or an overcoat,
that can be borrowed by unconscious or deliberate mistake; it is like
the living skin itself. If the body of a draught-horse enters into the
skin of a race-horse, it will be safe to wager that such an anomaly
will never win a race, and will fail even to drag a cart. Have we not
watched some modern Japanese artists imitating European art? The
imitation may sometimes produce clever results; but such cleverness
has only the perfection of artificial flowers which never bear fruit.

All great countries have their vital centres for intellectual life,
where a high standard of learning is maintained, where the minds of
the people are naturally attracted, where they find their genial
atmosphere, in which to prove their worth and to contribute their
share to the country's culture. Thus they kindle, on the common altar
of the land, that great sacrificial fire which can radiate the sacred
light of wisdom abroad.

Athens was such a centre in Greece, Rome in Italy; and Paris is such
to-day in France. Benares has been and still continues to be the
centre of our Sanskrit culture. But Sanskrit learning does not exhaust
all the elements of culture that exist in modern India.

If we were to take for granted, what some people maintain, that
Western culture is the only source of light for our mind, then it
would be like depending for daybreak upon some star, which is the sun
of a far distant sphere. The star may give us light, but not the day;
it may give us direction in our voyage of exploration, but it can
never open the full view of truth before our eyes. In fact, we can
never use this cold starlight for stirring the sap in our branches,
and giving colour and bloom to our life. This is the reason why
European education has become for India mere school lessons and no
culture; a box of matches, good for the small uses of illumination,
but not the light of morning, in which the use and beauty, and all the
subtle mysteries of life are blended in one.

Let me say clearly that I have no distrust of any culture because of
its foreign character. On the contrary, I believe that the shock of
such extraneous forces is necessary for the vitality of our
intellectual nature. It is admitted that much of the spirit of
Christianity runs counter, not only to the classical culture of
Europe, but to the European temperament altogether. And yet this alien
movement of ideas, constantly running against the natural mental
current of Europe, has been a most important factor in strengthening
and enriching her civilisation, on account of the sharp antagonism of
its intellectual direction. In fact, the European vernaculars first
woke up to life and fruitful vigour when they felt the impact of this
foreign thought-power with all its oriental forms and affinities. The
same thing is happening in India. The European culture has come to us,
not only with its knowledge, but with its velocity.

Then, again, let us admit that modern Science is Europe's great gift
to humanity for all time to come. We, in India, must claim it from her
hands, and gratefully accept it in order to be saved from the curse of
futility by lagging behind. We shall fail to reap the harvest of the
present age if we delay.

What I object to is the artificial arrangement by which foreign
education tends to occupy all the space of our national mind, and thus
kills, or hampers, the great opportunity for the creation of a new
thought-power by a new combination of truths. It is this which makes
me urge that all the elements in our own culture have to be
strengthened, not to resist the Western culture, but truly to accept
and assimilate it; to use it for our sustenance, not as our burden; to
get mastery over this culture, and not to live on its outskirts as the
hewers of texts and drawers of book-learning.

The main river in Indian culture has flowed in four streams,--the
Vedic, the Puranic, the Buddhist, and the Jain. It has its source in
the heights of the Indian consciousness. But a river, belonging to a
country, is not fed by its own waters alone. The Tibetan Brahmaputra
is a tributary to the Indian Ganges. Contributions have similarly
found their way to India's original culture. The Muhammadan, for
example, has repeatedly come into India from outside, laden with his
own stores of knowledge and feeling and his wonderful religious
democracy, bringing freshet after freshet to swell the current. To our
music, our architecture, our pictorial art, our literature, the
Muhammadans have made their permanent and precious contribution. Those
who have studied the lives and writings of our medieval saints, and
all the great religious movements that sprang up in the time of the
Muhammadan rule, know how deep is our debt to this foreign current
that has so intimately mingled with our life.

So, in our centre of Indian learning, we must provide for the
co-ordinate study of all these different cultures,--the Vedic, the
Puranic, the Buddhist, the Jain, the Islamic, the Sikh and the
Zoroastrian. The Chinese, Japanese, and Tibetan will also have to be
added; for, in the past, India did not remain isolated within her own
boundaries. Therefore, in order to learn what she was, in her relation
to the whole continent of Asia, these cultures too must be studied.
Side by side with them must finally be placed the Western culture. For
only then shall we be able to assimilate this last contribution to our
common stock. A river flowing within banks is truly our own, and it
can contain its due tributaries; but our relations with a flood can
only prove disastrous.

There are some who are exclusively modern, who believe that the past
is the bankrupt time, leaving no assets for us, but only a legacy of
debts. They refuse to believe that the army which is marching forward
can be fed from the rear. It is well to remind such persons that the
great ages of renaissance in history were those when man suddenly
discovered the seeds of thought in the granary of the past.

The unfortunate people who have lost the harvest of their past have
lost their present age. They have missed their seed for cultivation,
and go begging for their bare livelihood. We must not imagine that we
are one of these disinherited peoples of the world. The time has come
for us to break open the treasure-trove of our ancestors, and use it
for our commerce of life. Let us, with its help, make our future our
own, and not continue our existence as the eternal rag-pickers in
other people's dustbins.

So far I have dwelt only upon the intellectual aspect of Education.
For, even in the West, it is the intellectual training which receives
almost exclusive emphasis. The Western universities have not yet truly
recognised that fulness of expression is fulness of life. And a large
part of man can never find its expression in the mere language of
words. It must therefore seek for its other languages,--lines and
colours, sounds and movements. Through our mastery of these we not
only make our whole nature articulate, but also understand man in all
his attempts to reveal his innermost being in every age and clime. The
great use of Education is not merely to collect facts, but to know
man and to make oneself known to man. It is the duty of every human
being to master, at least to some extent, not only the language of
intellect, but also that personality which is the language of Art. It
is a great world of reality for man,--vast and profound,--this growing
world of his own creative nature. This is the world of Art. To be
brought up in ignorance of it is to be deprived of the knowledge and
use of that great inheritance of humanity, which has been growing and
waiting for every one of us from the beginning of our history. It is
to remain deaf to the eternal voice of Man, that speaks to all men the
messages that are beyond speech. From the educational point of view we
know Europe where it is scientific, or at best literary. So our notion
of its modern culture is limited within the boundary lines of grammar
and the laboratory. We almost completely ignore the æsthetic life of
man, leaving it uncultivated, allowing weeds to grow there. Our
newspapers are prolific, our meeting-places are vociferous; and in
them we wear to shreds the things we have borrowed from our English
teachers. We make the air dismal and damp with the tears of our
grievances. But where are our arts, which, like the outbreak of
spring flowers, are the spontaneous overflow of our deeper nature and
spiritual magnificence?

Through this great deficiency of our modern education, we are
condemned to carry to the end a dead load of dumb wisdom. Like
miserable outcasts, we are deprived of our place in the festival of
culture, and wait at the outer court, where the colours are not for
us, nor the forms of delight, nor the songs. Ours is the education of
a prison-house, with hard labour and with a drab dress cut to the
limits of minimum decency and necessity. We are made to forget that
the perfection of colour and form and expression belongs to the
perfection of vitality,--that the joy of life is only the other side
of the strength of life. The timber merchant may think that the
flowers and foliage are mere frivolous decorations of a tree; but if
these are suppressed, he will know to his cost that the timber too
will fail.

During the Moghal period, music and art in India found a great impetus
from the rulers, because their whole life--not merely their official
life--was lived in this land; and it is the wholeness of life from
which originates Art. But our English teachers are birds of passage;
they cackle to us, but do not sing,--their true heart is not in the
land of their exile.

Constriction of life, owing to this narrowness of culture, must no
longer be encouraged. In the centre of Indian culture which I am
proposing, music and art must have their prominent seats of honour,
and not be given merely a tolerant nod of recognition. The different
systems of music and different schools of art which lie scattered in
the different ages and provinces of India, and in the different strata
of society, and also those belonging to the other great countries of
Asia, which had communication with India, have to be brought there
together and studied.

I have already hinted that Education should not be dragged out of its
native element, the life-current of the people. Economic life covers
the whole width of the fundamental basis of society, because its
necessities are the simplest and the most universal. Educational
institutions, in order to obtain their fulness of truth, must have
close association with this economic life. The highest mission of
education is to help us to realise the inner principle of the unity of
all knowledge and all the activities of our social and spiritual
being. Society in its early stage was held together by its economic
co-operation, when all its members felt in unison a natural interest
in their right to live. Civilisation could never have been started at
all if such was not the case. And civilisation will fall to pieces if
it never again realises the spirit of mutual help and the common
sharing of benefits in the elemental necessaries of life. The idea of
such economic co-operation should be made the basis of our University.
It must not only instruct, but live; not only think, but produce.

Our ancient _tapovanas_, or forest schools, which were our natural
universities, were not shut off from the daily life of the people.
Masters and students gathered fruit and fuel, and took their cattle
out to graze, supporting themselves by the work of their own hands.
Spiritual education was a part of the spiritual life itself, which
comprehended all life. Our centre of culture should not only be the
centre of the intellectual life of India, but the centre of her
economic life also. It must co-operate with the villages round it,
cultivate land, breed cattle, spin cloths, press oil from oil-seeds;
it must produce all the necessaries, devising the best means, using
the best materials, and calling science to its aid. Its very existence
should depend upon the success of its industrial activities carried
out on the co-operative principle, which will unite the teachers and
students and villagers of the neighbourhood in a living and active
bond of necessity. This will give us also a practical industrial
training, whose motive force is not the greed of profit.

Before I conclude my paper, a delicate question remains to be
considered. What must be the religious ideal that is to rule our
centre of Indian culture? The one abiding ideal in the religious life
of India has been _Mukti_, the deliverance of man's soul from the grip
of self, its communion with the Infinite Soul through its union in
_ânanda_ with the universe. This religion of spiritual harmony is not
a theological doctrine to be taught, as a subject in the class, for
half an hour each day. It is the spiritual truth and beauty of our
attitude towards our surroundings, our conscious relationship with the
Infinite, and the lasting power of the Eternal in the passing moments
of our life. Such a religious ideal can only be made possible by
making provision for students to live in intimate touch with nature,
daily to grow in an atmosphere of service offered to all creatures,
tending trees, feeding birds and animals, learning to feel the immense
mystery of the soil and water and air.

Along with this, there should be some common sharing of life with the
tillers of the soil and the humble workers in the neighbouring
villages; studying their crafts, inviting them to the feasts, joining
them in works of co-operation for communal welfare; and in our
intercourse we should be guided, not by moral maxims or the
condescension of social superiority, but by natural sympathy of life
for life, and by the sheer necessity of love's sacrifice for its own
sake. In such an atmosphere students would learn to understand that
humanity is a divine harp of many strings, waiting for its one grand
music. Those who realise this unity are made ready for the pilgrimage
through the night of suffering, and along the path of sacrifice, to
the great meeting of Man in the future, for which the call comes to us
across the darkness.

Life, in such a centre, should be simple and clean. We should never
believe that simplicity of life might make us unsuited to the
requirements of the society of our time. It is the simplicity of the
tuning-fork, which is needed all the more because of the intricacy of
strings in the instrument. In the morning of our career our nature
needs the pure and the perfect note of a spiritual ideal in order to
fit us for the complications of our later years.

In other words, this institution should be a perpetual creation by the
co-operative enthusiasm of teachers and students, growing with the
growth of their soul; a world in itself, self-sustaining, independent,
rich with ever-renewing life, radiating life across space and time,
attracting and maintaining round it a planetary system of dependent
bodies. Its aim should lie in imparting life-breath to the complete
man, who is intellectual as well as economic, bound by social bonds,
but aspiring towards spiritual freedom and final perfection.


                                THE END

  _Printed in Great Britain by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




                        BY RABINDRANATH TAGORE


=GITANJALI. (Song Offerings.)= Translated by the Author. With an
Introduction by W. B. YEATS, and a Portrait by W. ROTHENSTEIN. Crown
8vo. 5s. net.

_ATHENÆUM._--"Mr. Tagore's translations are of trance-like beauty....
The expanding sentiment of some of the poems wins, even through the
alien medium of our English prose, a rhythm which in its strength and
melody might recall familiar passages in the Psalms or Solomon's
Song."


=FRUIT-GATHERING. A Sequel to "Gitanjali."= Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

_ATHENÆUM._--"The eighty-six pieces that fill this volume are pure
jets of lyric feeling, aphorisms expressed in moving symbols, or fully
developed parables and allegories ... several are as perfect in form
as they are beautiful and poignant in content."


=GITANJALI AND FRUIT-GATHERING.=

With Illustrations in colour and half-tone by NANDALAL BOSE,
SURENDRANATH KAR, ABANINDRANATH TAGORE, and NOBINDRANATH TAGORE. Crown
8vo. 10s. net.


=THE GARDENER. Lyrics of Love and Life.= Translated by the Author. With
Portrait. Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

_DAILY MAIL._--"Flowers as fresh as sunrise.... One cannot tell what
they have lost in the translation, but as they stand they are of
extreme beauty.... They are simple, exalted, fragrant--episodes and
incidents of every day transposed to faery."


=THE CRESCENT MOON. Child-Poems.= Translated by the Author. With 8
Illustrations in Colour. Pott 4to. 5s. net.

_NATION._--"A vision of childhood which is only paralleled in our
literature by the work of William Blake."


=STRAY BIRDS.= Poems. With a Frontispiece by WILLY POGÁNY. Crown 8vo.
4s. 6d. net.

_SCOTSMAN._--"The richness of this volume in thought and in imagery,
in tracing analogies and in discovering apologues, is such as to yield
pleasure and profit to the most fertile and cultured minds."


=LOVER'S GIFT AND CROSSING.= Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

_ATHENÆUM._--"The poems often touch extreme heights of passion and
sublimity, and the diction has a beauty and a music that few have
attained in this particular medium."


=THE FUGITIVE.= Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

_SUNDAY TIMES._--"In 'The Fugitive' the lovers of Tagore will not be
disappointed. He has all his powers still undimmed. Indeed, the poet
never, in our judgment, has surpassed this work."


=CHITRA. A Play.= Translated by the Author. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

_OBSERVER._--"An allegory of love's meaning, clear as a pool in the
sunshine. It was written, we are told, twenty-five years ago.... Even
then Mr. Tagore had that calm intensity of vision which we have all
come to love in his later work. We find in him that for which Arjuna
groped in his love, 'that ultimate _you_, that bare simplicity of
truth,' and never more than in this little work of beauty, 'Chitra.'"


=THE KING OF THE DARK CHAMBER.= =A Play.= Translated by KSHITISH CHANDRA
SEN. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

_PALL MALL GAZETTE._--"Altogether, the play is a beautiful piece of
fanciful writing with a veiled purpose at the back of it."


=THE POST OFFICE. A Play.= Translated by DEVABRATA MUKERJEA. Crown 8vo.
3s. 6d. net.

_MANCHESTER GUARDIAN._--"'The Post Office' is a delicate, wistful
thing, coloured with beautiful imagery; for a moment it lifts a corner
of the veil of worldly existence. The translation is throughout
extremely happy."


=THE CYCLE OF SPRING. A Play.= Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

_MANCHESTER GUARDIAN._--"The whole little drama is a spring-gift such
as England has seldom received."


=SACRIFICE and other Plays.= Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

_SCOTSMAN._--"All the pieces have a rare beauty of their own."


=THE HOME AND THE WORLD. A Novel.= Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

_SATURDAY REVIEW._--"In these days of indiscriminating praise, it is
hard for a reviewer to find words with which to welcome properly a
book so good as this."


=THE WRECK. A Novel.= Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d. net.

_MORNING POST._--"The story cannot fail to interest and delight."


=MASHI and other Stories.= Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

_OXFORD MAGAZINE._--"Full of pregnant pictures of Indian life and
character, subdued but vivid in tone."


=HUNGRY STONES and other Stories.= Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

_DAILY TELEGRAPH._--"Contains descriptive passages of rare vigour and
beauty, and is embellished with imagery of a delicate and distinctive
character."


=S[=A]DHAN[=A]: The Realisation of Life. Lectures.= Extra Crown 8vo. 6s.
net.

=NATIONALISM.= Extra Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

=PERSONALITY. Lectures delivered in America.= Illustrated. Crown 8vo.
6s. net.

=CREATIVE UNITY. Essays.= Extra Crown 8vo.

=MY REMINISCENCES.= Illustrated. Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=GLIMPSES OF BENGAL. Selected from the Letters of Rabindranath Tagore,
1885 to 1895.= Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=ONE HUNDRED POEMS OF KABIR.= Translated by RABINDRANATH TAGORE,
assisted by EVELYN UNDERHILL. Crown 8vo. 5s. net.

=RABINDRANATH TAGORE.= A Biographical Study. By ERNEST RHYS.
Illustrated. Extra Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. net.

=SIX PORTRAITS OF RABINDRANATH TAGORE.= By W. ROTHENSTEIN. Reproduced in
Collotype. With Prefatory Note by MAX BEERBOHM. Imperial 4to. 10s.
net.

=THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MAHARSHI DEVENDRANATH TAGORE= (Father of
RABINDRANATH TAGORE). Translated by SATYENDRANATH TAGORE and INDIRA
DEVI. With Introduction by EVELYN UNDERHILL, and Portrait. Extra Crown
8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=THE PHILOSOPHY OF RABINDRANATH TAGORE.= By Prof. S. RADHAKRISHNAN. 8vo.
8s. 6d. net.

=SHANTINIKETAN: The Bolpur School of Rabindranath Tagore.= By W. W.
PEARSON. With Introduction by RABINDRANATH TAGORE. Illustrated. 8vo.
4s. 6d. net.

                    LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

Obvious typographic errors have been corrected. The page numbers
in the Table of Contents have been adjusted to match the actual page
numbers.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CREATIVE UNITY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Crescent Moon
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Crescent Moon

Translator: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6520]
                Most recently updated: March 29, 2014

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Eric Eldred and Chetan K Jain.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRESCENT MOON ***




Produced by Eric Eldred and Chetan K Jain.










The Crescent Moon


By Rabindranath Tagore

Translated from the original Bengali by the author

with eight illustrations in colour

London and New York: Macmillan and Company, 1913


TO T. STURGE MOORE


[Frontispiece: From a drawing by Nandalall Bose--see cbeach.jpg]




  CONTENTS


  THE HOME
  ON THE SEASHORE
  THE SOURCE
  BABY'S WAY
  THE UNHEEDED PAGEANT
  SLEEP-STEALER
  THE BEGINNING
  BABY'S WORLD
  WHEN AND WHY
  DEFAMATION
  THE JUDGE
  PLAYTHINGS
  THE ASTRONOMER
  CLOUDS AND WAVES
  THE CHAMPA FLOWER
  FAIRYLAND
  THE LAND OF THE EXILE
  THE RAINY DAY
  PAPER BOATS
  THE SAILOR
  THE FURTHER BANK
  THE FLOWER-SCHOOL
  THE MERCHANT
  SYMPATHY
  VOCATION
  SUPERIOR
  THE LITTLE BIG MAN
  TWELVE O'CLOCK
  AUTHORSHIP
  THE WICKED POSTMAN
  THE HERO
  THE END
  THE RECALL
  THE FIRST JASMINES
  THE BANYAN TREE
  BENEDICTION
  THE GIFT
  MY SONG
  THE CHILD-ANGEL
  THE LAST BARGAIN




  LIST OF COLOURED ILLUSTRATIONS


  FRONTISPIECE
  THE HOME
  THE BEGINNING
  FAIRYLAND
  PAPER BOATS
  THE MERCHANT
  THE HERO
  BENEDICTION




  INDEX OF THE FIRST LINES


  Ah, these jasmines
  Ah, who was it coloured that little frock
  Bless this little heart
  Child, how happy you are sitting in the dust
  Come and hire me
  Day by day I float my paper boats
  I am small because I am a little child
  If baby only wanted to, he could fly
  If I were only a little puppy
  If people came to know where my king's palace is
  I long to go over there
  Imagine, mother
  I only said, "When in the evening"
  I paced alone
  It is time for me to go, mother
  I want to give you something, my child
  I wish I could take a quiet corner
  Mother, I do want to leave off my lessons
  Mother, let us imagine we are travelling
  Mother, the folk who live up in the clouds
  Mother, the light has grown grey
  Mother, your baby is silly
  On the seashore of endless worlds
  O you shaggy-headed banyan tree
  Say of him what you please
  Sullen clouds are gathering
  Supposing I became a _champa_ flower
  The boat of the boatman Madhu
  The night was dark when we went away
  The sleep that flits on baby's eyes
  They clamour and fight
  This song of mine
  When I bring you coloured toys
  When storm clouds
  When the gong sounds ten
  Where have I come from
  Who stole sleep from baby's eyes
  Why are those tears in your eyes, my child
  Why do you sit there on the floor
  You say that father writes a lot of books






[Illustration: The Home--from a drawing by Nandalall Bose--see
chome.jpg]


THE HOME


I paced alone on the road across the field while the sunset was
hiding its last gold like a miser.

The daylight sank deeper and deeper into the darkness, and the
widowed land, whose harvest had been reaped, lay silent.

Suddenly a boy's shrill voice rose into the sky.  He traversed
the dark unseen, leaving the track of his song across the hush of
the evening.

His village home lay there at the end of the waste land, beyond
the sugar-cane field, hidden among the shadows of the banana and
the slender areca palm, the cocoa-nut and the dark green
jack-fruit trees.

I stopped for a moment in my lonely way under the starlight, and
saw spread before me the darkened earth surrounding with her arms
countless homes furnished with cradles and beds, mothers' hearts
and evening lamps, and young lives glad with a gladness that
knows nothing of its value for the world.




ON THE SEASHORE


On the seashore of endless worlds children meet.

The infinite sky is motionless overhead and the restless water is
boisterous.  On the seashore of endless worlds the children meet
with shouts and dances.

They build their houses with sand, and they play with empty
shells.  With withered leaves they weave their boats and
smilingly float them on the vast deep.  Children have their play
on the seashore of worlds.

They know not how to swim, they know not how to cast nets.
Pearl-fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in their ships,
while children gather pebbles and scatter them again.  They seek
not for hidden treasures, they know not how to cast nets.

The sea surges up with laughter, and pale gleams the smile of the
sea-beach.  Death-dealing waves sing meaningless ballads to the
children, even like a mother while rocking her baby's cradle.
The sea plays with children, and pale gleams the smile of the
sea-beach.

On the seashore of endless worlds children meet.  Tempest roams
in the pathless sky, ships are wrecked in the trackless water,
death is abroad and children play.  On the seashore of endless
worlds is the great meeting of children.




THE SOURCE


The sleep that flits on baby's eyes--does anybody know from where
it comes?  Yes, there is a rumour that it has its dwelling where,
in the fairy village among shadows of the forest dimly lit with
glow-worms, there hang two shy buds of enchantment.  From there
it comes to kiss baby's eyes.

The smile that flickers on baby's lips when he sleeps--does
anybody know where it was born?  Yes, there is a rumour that a
young pale beam of a crescent moon touched the edge of a
vanishing autumn cloud, and there the smile was first born in the
dream of a dew-washed morning--the smile that flickers on baby's
lips when he sleeps.

The sweet, soft freshness that blooms on baby's limbs--does
anybody know where it was hidden so long?  Yes, when the mother
was a young girl it lay pervading her heart in tender and silent
mystery of love--the sweet, soft freshness that has bloomed on
baby's limbs.




BABY'S WAY


If baby only wanted to, he could fly up to heaven this moment.

It is not for nothing that he does not leave us.

He loves to rest his head on mother's bosom, and cannot ever bear
to lose sight of her.

Baby knows all manner of wise words, though few on earth can
understand their meaning.

It is not for nothing that he never wants to speak.

The one thing he wants is to learn mother's words from mother's
lips.  That is why he looks so innocent.

Baby had a heap of gold and pearls, yet he came like a beggar on
to this earth.

It is not for nothing he came in such a disguise.

This dear little naked mendicant pretends to be utterly helpless,
so that he may beg for mother's wealth of love.

Baby was so free from every tie in the land of the tiny crescent
moon.

It was not for nothing he gave up his freedom.

He knows that there is room for endless joy in mother's little
corner of a heart, and it is sweeter far than liberty to be
caught and pressed in her dear arms.

Baby never knew how to cry.  He dwelt in the land of perfect
bliss.

It is not for nothing he has chosen to shed tears.

Though with the smile of his dear face he draws mother's yearning
heart to him, yet his little cries over tiny troubles weave the
double bond of pity and love.




THE UNHEEDED PAGEANT


Ah, who was it coloured that little frock, my child, and covered
your sweet limbs with that little red tunic?

You have come out in the morning to play in the courtyard,
tottering and tumbling as you run.

But who was it coloured that little frock, my child?

What is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?

Mother smiles at you standing on the threshold.

She claps her hands and her bracelets jingle, and you dance with
your bamboo stick in your hand like a tiny little shepherd.

But what is it makes you laugh, my little life-bud?

O beggar, what do you beg for, clinging to your mother's neck
with both your hands?

O greedy heart, shall I pluck the world like a fruit from the sky
to place it on your little rosy palm?

O beggar, what are you begging for?

The wind carries away in glee the tinkling of your anklet bells.

The sun smiles and watches your toilet.  The sky watches over you
when you sleep in your mother's arms, and the morning comes
tiptoe to your bed and kisses your eyes.

The wind carries away in glee the tinkling of your anklet bells.

The fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying
through the twilight sky.

The world-mother keeps her seat by you in your mother's heart.

He who plays his music to the stars is standing at your window
with his flute.

And the fairy mistress of dreams is coming towards you, flying
through the twilight sky.




SLEEP-STEALER


Who stole sleep from baby's eyes?  I must know.

Clasping her pitcher to her waist mother went to fetch water from
the village near by.

It was noon.  The children's playtime was over; the ducks in the
pond were silent.

The shepherd boy lay asleep under the shadow of the _banyan_
tree.

The crane stood grave and still in the swamp near the mango
grove.

In the meanwhile the Sleep-stealer came and, snatching sleep from
baby's eyes, flew away.

When mother came back she found baby travelling the room over on
all fours.

Who stole sleep from our baby's eyes?  I must know.  I must find
her and chain her up.

I must look into that dark cave, where, through boulders and
scowling stones, trickles a tiny stream.

I must search in the drowsy shade of the _bakula_ grove,
where pigeons coo in their corner, and fairies' anklets tinkle in
the stillness of starry nights.

In the evening I will peep into the whispering silence of the
bamboo forest, where fireflies squander their light, and will ask
every creature I meet, "Can anybody tell me where the
Sleep-stealer lives?"

Who stole sleep from baby's eyes?  I must know.

Shouldn't I give her a good lesson if I could only catch her!

I would raid her nest and see where she hoards all her stolen
sleep.

I would plunder it all, and carry it home.

I would bind her two wings securely, set her on the bank of the
river, and then let her play at fishing with a reed among the
rushes and water-lilies.

When the marketing is over in the evening, and the village
children sit in their mothers' laps, then the night birds will
mockingly din her ears with:

"Whose sleep will you steal now?"




[Illustration: From a drawing by Asit Kumar Haldar--see
cbegin.jpg]


THE BEGINNING


"Where have I come from, where did you pick me up?"  the baby
asked its mother.

She answered half crying, half laughing, and clasping the baby to
her breast,-- "You were hidden in my heart as its desire, my
darling.

You were in the dolls of my childhood's games; and when with clay
I made the image of my god every morning, I made and unmade you
then.

You were enshrined with our household deity, in his worship I
worshipped you.

In all my hopes and my loves, in my life, in the life of my
mother you have lived.

In the lap of the deathless Spirit who rules our home you have
been nursed for ages.

When in girlhood my heart was opening its petals, you hovered as
a fragrance about it.

Your tender softness bloomed in my youthful limbs, like a glow in
the sky before the sunrise.

Heaven's first darling, twin-born with the morning light, you
have floated down the stream of the world's life, and at last you
have stranded on my heart.

As I gaze on your face, mystery overwhelms me; you who belong to
all have become mine.

For fear of losing you I hold you tight to my breast.  What magic
has snared the world's treasure in these slender arms of mine?"




BABY'S WORLD


I wish I could take a quiet corner in the heart of my baby's very
own world.

I know it has stars that talk to him, and a sky that stoops down
to his face to amuse him with its silly clouds and rainbows.

Those who make believe to be dumb, and look as if they never
could move, come creeping to his window with their stories and
with trays crowded with bright toys.

I wish I could travel by the road that crosses baby's mind, and
out beyond all bounds;

Where messengers run errands for no cause between the kingdoms of
kings of no history;

Where Reason makes kites of her laws and flies them, and Truth
sets Fact free from its fetters.




WHEN AND WHY


When I bring you coloured toys, my child, I understand why there
is such a play of colours on clouds, on water, and why flowers
are painted in tints--when I give coloured toys to you, my child.

When I sing to make you dance, I truly know why there is music in
leaves, and why waves send their chorus of voices to the heart of
the listening earth--when I sing to make you dance.

When I bring sweet things to your greedy hands, I know why there
is honey in the cup of the flower, and why fruits are secretly
filled with sweet juice--when I bring sweet things to your greedy
hands.

When I kiss your face to make you smile, my darling, I surely
understand what pleasure streams from the sky in morning light,
and what delight the summer breeze brings to my body--when I kiss
you to make you smile.




DEFAMATION


Why are those tears in your eyes, my child?

How horrid of them to be always scolding you for nothing?

You have stained your fingers and face with ink while writing--is
that why they call you dirty?

O, fie!  Would they dare to call the full moon dirty because it
has smudged its face with ink?

For every little trifle they blame you, my child.  They are ready
to find fault for nothing.

You tore your clothes while playing--is that why they call you
untidy?

O, fie!  What would they call an autumn morning that smiles
through its ragged clouds?

Take no heed of what they say to you, my child.

Take no heed of what they say to you, my child.

They make a long list of your misdeeds.  Everybody knows how you
love sweet things--is that why they call you greedy?

O, fie!  What then would they call us who love you?




THE JUDGE


Say of him what you please, but I know my child's failings.

I do not love him because he is good, but because he is my little
child.

How should you know how dear he can be when you try to weigh his
merits against his faults?

When I must punish him he becomes all the more a part of my
being.

When I cause his tears to come my heart weeps with him.

I alone have a right to blame and punish, for he only may
chastise who loves.




PLAYTHINGS


Child, how happy you are sitting in the dust, playing with a
broken twig all the morning.

I smile at your play with that little bit of a broken twig.

I am busy with my accounts, adding up figures by the hour.

Perhaps you glance at me and think, "What a stupid game to spoil
your morning with!"

Child, I have forgotten the art of being absorbed in sticks and
mud-pies.

I seek out costly playthings, and gather lumps of gold and
silver.

With whatever you find you create your glad games, I spend both
my time and my strength over things I never can obtain.

In my frail canoe I struggle to cross the sea of desire, and
forget that I too am playing a game.




THE ASTRONOMER


I only said, "When in the evening the round full moon gets
entangled among the branches of that _Kadam_ tree, couldn't
somebody catch it?"

But dâdâ [_elder brother_] laughed at me and said, "Baby,
you are the silliest child I have ever known.  The moon is ever
so far from us, how could anybody catch it?"

I said, "Dâdâ how foolish you are!  When mother looks out of her
window and smiles down at us playing, would you call her far
away?"

Still said, "You are a stupid child!  But, baby, where could you
find a net big enough to catch the moon with?"

I said, "Surely you could catch it with your hands."

But dâdâ laughed and said, "You are the silliest child I have
known.  If it came nearer, you would see how big the moon is."

I said, "Dâdâ, what nonsense they teach at your school!  When
mother bends her face down to kiss us does her face look very
big?"

But still dâdâ says, "You are a stupid child."




CLOUDS AND WAVES


Mother, the folk who live up in the clouds call out to me--

"We play from the time we wake till the day ends.

We play with the golden dawn, we play with the silver moon.

I ask, "But, how am I to get up to you?"  They answer, "Come to
the edge of the earth, lift up your hands to the sky, and you
will be taken up into the clouds."

"My mother is waiting for me at home," I say.  "How can I leave
her and come?"

Then they smile and float away.

But I know a nicer game than that, mother.

I shall be the cloud and you the moon.

I shall cover you with both my hands, and our house-top will be
the blue sky.

The folk who live in the waves call out to me--

"We sing from morning till night; on and on we travel and know
not where we pass."

I ask, "But, how am I to join you?"  They tell me, "Come to the
edge of the shore and stand with your eyes tight shut, and you
will be carried out upon the waves."

I say, "My mother always wants me at home in the evening--how can
I leave her and go?"

Then they smile, dance and pass by.

But I know a better game than that.

I will be the waves and you will be a strange shore.

I shall roll on and on and on, and break upon your lap with
laughter.

And no one in the world will know where we both are.




THE CHAMPA FLOWER


Supposing I became a _champa_ flower, just for fun, and
grew on a branch high up that tree, and shook in the wind with
laughter and danced upon the newly budded leaves, would you know
me, mother?

You would call, "Baby, where are you?"  and I should laugh to
myself and keep quite quiet.

I should slyly open my petals and watch you at your work.

When after your bath, with wet hair spread on your shoulders, you
walked through the shadow of the _champa_ tree to the
little court where you say your prayers, you would notice the
scent of the flower, but not know that it came from me.

When after the midday meal you sat at the window reading
_Ramayana_, and the tree's shadow fell over your hair and
your lap, I should fling my wee little shadow on to the page of
your book, just where you were reading.

But would you guess that it was the tiny shadow of your little
child?

When in the evening you went to the cow-shed with the lighted
lamp in your hand, I should suddenly drop on to the earth again
and be your own baby once more, and beg you to tell me a story.

"Where have you been, you naughty child?"

"I won't tell you, mother."  That's what you and I would say
then.




[Illustration: From a drawing by Abanindranath Tagore--see
cfairy.jpg]


FAIRYLAND


If people came to know where my king's palace is, it would vanish
into the air.

The walls are of white silver and the roof of shining gold.

The queen lives in a palace with seven courtyards, and she wears
a jewel that cost all the wealth of seven kingdoms.

But let me tell you, mother, in a whisper, where my king's palace
is.

It is at the corner of our terrace where the pot of the
_tulsi_ plant stands.

The princess lies sleeping on the far-away shore of the seven
impassable seas.

There is none in the world who can find her but myself.

She has bracelets on her arms and pearl drops in her ears; her
hair sweeps down upon the floor.

She will wake when I touch her with my magic wand, and jewels
will fall from her lips when she smiles.

But let me whisper in your ear, mother; she is there in the
corner of our terrace where the pot of the _tulsi_ plant
stands.

When it is time for you to go to the river for your bath, step up
to that terrace on the roof.

I sit in the corner where the shadows of the walls meet together.

Only puss is allowed to come with me, for she knows where the
barber in the story lives.

But let me whisper, mother, in your ear where the barber in the
story lives.

It is at the corner of the terrace where the pot of the
_tulsi_ plant stands.




THE LAND OF THE EXILE


Mother, the light has grown grey in the sky; I do not know what
the time is.

There is no fun in my play, so I have come to you.  It is
Saturday, our holiday.

Leave off your work, mother; sit here by the window and tell me
where the desert of Tepântar in the fairy tale is?

The shadow of the rains has covered the day from end to end.

The fierce lightning is scratching the sky with its nails.

When the clouds rumble and it thunders, I love to be afraid in my
heart and cling to you.

When the heavy rain patters for hours on the bamboo leaves, and
our windows shake and rattle at the gusts of wind, I like to sit
alone in the room, mother, with you, and hear you talk about the
desert of Tepântar in the fairy tale.

Where is it, mother, on the shore of what sea, at the foot of
what hills, in the kingdom of what king?

There are no hedges there to mark the fields, no footpath across
it by which the villagers reach their village in the evening, or
the woman who gathers dry sticks in the forest can bring her load
to the market.  With patches of yellow grass in the sand and only
one tree where the pair of wise old birds have their nest, lies
the desert of Tepântar.

I can imagine how, on just such a cloudy day, the young son of
the king is riding alone on a grey horse through the desert, in
search of the princess who lies imprisoned in the giant's palace
across that unknown water.

When the haze of the rain comes down in the distant sky, and
lightning starts up like a sudden fit of pain, does he remember
his unhappy mother, abandoned by the king, sweeping the cow-stall
and wiping her eyes, while he rides through the desert of
Tepântar in the fairy tale?

See, mother, it is almost dark before the day is over, and there
are no travellers yonder on the village road.

The shepherd boy has gone home early from the pasture, and men
have left their fields to sit on mats under the eaves of their
huts, watching the scowling clouds.

Mother, I have left all my books on the shelf--do not ask me to
do my lessons now.

When I grow up and am big like my father, I shall learn all that
must be learnt.

But just for to-day, tell me, mother, where the desert of
Tepântar in the fairy tale is?




THE RAINY DAY


Sullen clouds are gathering fast over the black fringe of the
forest.

O child, do not go out!

The palm trees in a row by the lake are smiting their heads
against the dismal sky; the crows with their draggled wings are
silent on the tamarind branches, and the eastern bank of the
river is haunted by a deepening gloom.

Our cow is lowing loud, tied at the fence.

O child, wait here till I bring her into the stall.

Men have crowded into the flooded field to catch the fishes as
they escape from the overflowing ponds; the rain water is running
in rills through the narrow lanes like a laughing boy who has run
away from his mother to tease her.

Listen, someone is shouting for the boatman at the ford.

O child, the daylight is dim, and the crossing at the ferry is
closed.

The sky seems to ride fast upon the madly-rushing rain; the water
in the river is loud and impatient; women have hastened home
early from the Ganges with their filled pitchers.

The evening lamps must be made ready.

O child, do not go out!

The road to the market is desolate, the lane to the river is
slippery.  The wind is roaring and struggling among the bamboo
branches like a wild beast tangled in a net.




[Illustration: From a drawing by Surendranath Ganguli--see
cboat.jpg]


PAPER BOATS


Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running
stream.

In big black letters I write my name on them and the name of the
village where I live.

I hope that someone in some strange land will find them and know
who I am.

I load my little boats with _shiuli_ flowers from our
garden, and hope that these blooms of the dawn will be carried
safely to land in the night.

I launch my paper boats and look up into the sky and see the
little clouds setting their white bulging sails.

I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends them down the
air to race with my boats!

When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my
paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars.

The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading is their
baskets full of dreams.




THE SAILOR


The boat of the boatman Madhu is moored at the wharf of Rajgunj.

It is uselessly laden with jute, and has been lying there idle
for ever so long.

If he would only lend me his boat, I should man her with a
hundred oars, and hoist sails, five or six or seven.

I should never steer her to stupid markets.  I should sail the
seven seas and the thirteen rivers of fairyland.

But, mother, you won't weep for me in a corner.

I am not going into the forest like Ramachandra to come back only
after fourteen years.

I shall become the prince of the story, and fill my boat with
whatever I like.

I shall take my friend Ashu with me.  We shall sail merrily
across the seven seas and the thirteen rivers of fairyland.

We shall set sail in the early morning light.

When at noontide you are bathing at the pond, we shall be in the
land of a strange king.

We shall pass the ford of Tirpurni, and leave behind us the
desert of Tepântar.

When we come back it will be getting dark, and I shall tell you
of all that we have seen.

I shall cross the seven seas and the thirteen rivers of
fairyland.




THE FURTHER BANK


I long to go over there to the further bank of the river,

Where those boats are tied to the bamboo poles in a line;

Where men cross over in their boats in the morning with ploughs
on their shoulders to till their far-away fields;

Where the cowherds make their lowing cattle swim across to the
riverside pasture;

Whence they all come back home in the evening, leaving the
jackals to howl in the island overgrown with weeds,

Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman of
the ferry when I am grown up.

They say there are strange pools hidden behind that high bank,

Where flocks of wild ducks come when the rains are over, and
thick reeds grow round the margins where waterbirds lay their
eggs;

Where snipes with their dancing tails stamp their tiny footprints
upon the clean soft mud;

Where in the evening the tall grasses crested with white flowers
invite the moonbeam to float upon their waves.

Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman of
the ferryboat when I am grown up.

I shall cross and cross back from bank to bank, and all the boys
and girls of the village will wonder at me while they are
bathing.

When the sun climbs the mid sky and morning wears on to noon, I
shall come running to you, saying, "Mother, I am hungry!"

When the day is done and the shadows cower under the trees, I
shall come back in the dusk.

I shall never go away from you into the town to work like father.

Mother, if you don't mind, I should like to become the boatman of
the ferryboat when I am grown up.




THE FLOWER-SCHOOL


When storm clouds rumble in the sky and June showers come down,

The moist east wind comes marching over the heath to blow its
bagpipes among the bamboos.

Then crowds of flowers come out of a sudden, from nobody knows
where, and dance upon the grass in wild glee.

Mother, I really think the flowers go to school underground.

They do their lessons with doors shut, and if they want to come
out to play before it is time, their master makes them stand in a
corner.

When the rains come they have their holidays.

Branches clash together in the forest, and the leaves rustle in
the wild wind, the thunder-clouds clap their giant hands and the
flower children rush out in dresses of pink and yellow and white.

Do you know, mother, their home is in the sky, where the stars
are.

Haven't you seen how eager they are to get there?  Don't you know
why they are in such a hurry?

Of course, I can guess to whom they raise their arms: they have
their mother as I have my own.




[Illustration: From a drawing by Asit Kumar Haldar--see
cmerchant.jpg]


THE MERCHANT


Imagine, mother, that you are to stay at home and I am to travel
into strange lands.

Imagine that my boat is ready at the landing fully laden.

Now think well, mother, before you say what I shall bring for you
when I come back.

Mother, do you want heaps and heaps of gold?

There, by the banks of golden streams, fields are full of golden
harvest.

And in the shade of the forest path the golden _champa_
flowers drop on the ground.

I will gather them all for you in many hundred baskets.
Mother, do you want pearls big as the raindrops of autumn?

I shall cross to the pearl island shore.  There in the early
morning light pearls tremble on the meadow flowers, pearls drop
on the grass, and pearls are scattered on the sand in spray by
the wild sea-waves.

My brother shall have a pair of horses with wings to fly among
the clouds.

For father I shall bring a magic pen that, without his knowing,
will write of itself.

For you, mother, I must have the casket and jewel that cost seven
kings their kingdoms.




SYMPATHY


If I were only a little puppy, not your baby, mother dear, would
you say "No" to me if I tried to eat from your dish?

Would you drive me off, saying to me, "Get away, you naughty
little puppy?"

Then go, mother, go!  I will never come to you when you call me,
and never let you feed me any more.

If I were only a little green parrot, and not your baby, mother
dear, would you keep me chained lest I should fly away?

Would you shake your finger at me and say, "What an ungrateful
wretch of a bird!  It is gnawing at its chain day and night?"

Then, go, mother, go!  I will run away into the woods; I will
never let you take me in your arms again.




VOCATION


When the gong sounds ten in the morning and I walk to school by
our lane,

Every day I meet the hawker crying, "Bangles, crystal bangles!"

There is nothing to hurry him on, there is no road he must take,
no place he must go to, no time when he must come home.

I wish I were a hawker, spending my day in the road, crying,
"Bangles, crystal bangles!"

When at four in the afternoon I come back from the school,

I can see through the gate of that house the gardener digging the
ground.

He does what he likes with his spade, he soils his clothes with
dust, nobody takes him to task if he gets baked in the sun or
gets wet.

I wish I were a gardener digging away at the garden with nobody
to stop me from digging.

Just as it gets dark in the evening and my mother sends me to
bed,

I can see through my open window the watchman walking up and
down.

The lane is dark and lonely, and the street-lamp stands like a
giant with one red eye in its head.

The watchman swings his lantern and walks with his shadow at his
side, and never once goes to bed in his life.

I wish I were a watchman walking the streets all night, chasing
the shadows with my lantern.




SUPERIOR


Mother, your baby is silly!  She is so absurdly childish!

She does not know the difference between the lights in the
streets and the stars.

When we play at eating with pebbles, she thinks they are real
food, and tries to put them into her mouth.

When I open a book before her and ask her to learn her a, b, c,
she tears the leaves with her hands and roars for joy at nothing;
this is your baby's way of doing her lesson.

When I shake my head at her in anger and scold her and call her
naughty, she laughs and thinks it great fun.

Everybody knows that father is away, but if in play I call aloud
"Father," she looks about her in excitement and thinks that
father is near.

When I hold my class with the donkeys that our washerman brings
to carry away the clothes and I warn her that I am the
schoolmaster, she will scream for no reason and call me dâdâ.
[_elder brother_ ]

Your baby wants to catch the moon.  She is so funny; she calls
Ganesh Gânush.  [_Ganesh, a common name in India, also that of
the god with the elephant's head._]

Mother, your baby is silly, she is so absurdly childish!




THE LITTLE BIG MAN


I am small because I am a little child.  I shall be big when I am
as old as my father is.

My teacher will come and say, "It is late, bring your slate and
your books."

I shall tell him, "Do you not know I am as big as father?  And I
must not have lessons any more."

My master will wonder and say, "He can leave his books if he
likes, for he is grown up."

I shall dress myself and walk to the fair where the crowd is
thick.

My uncle will come rushing up to me and say, "You will get lost,
my boy; let me carry you."

I shall answer, "Can't you see, uncle, I am as big as father.  I
must go to the fair alone."

Uncle will say, "Yes, he can go wherever he likes, for he is
grown up."

Mother will come from her bath when I am giving money to my
nurse, for I shall know how to open the box with my key.

Mother will say, "What are you about, naughty child?"

I shall tell her, "Mother, don't you know, I am as big as father,
and I must give silver to my nurse."

Mother will say to herself, "He can give money to whom he likes,
for he is grown up."

In the holiday time in October father will come home and,
thinking that I am still a baby, will bring for me from the town
little shoes and small silken frocks.

I shall say, "Father, give them to my dâdâ [_elder
brother_], for I am as big as you are."

Father will think and say, "He can buy his own clothes if he
likes, for he is grown up."




TWELVE O'CLOCK


Mother, I do want to leave off my lessons now.  I have been at my
book all the morning.

You say it is only twelve o'clock.  Suppose it isn't any later;
can't you ever think it is afternoon when it is only twelve
o'clock?

I can easily imagine now that the sun has reached the edge of
that rice-field, and the old fisher-woman is gathering herbs for
her supper by the side of the pond.

I can just shut my eyes and think that the shadows are growing
darker under the _madar_ tree, and the water in the pond
looks shiny black.

If twelve o'clock can come in the night, why can't the night come
when it is twelve o'clock?




AUTHORSHIP


You say that father writes a lot of books, but what he writes I
don't understand.

He was reading to you all the evening, but could you really make
out what he meant?

What nice stories, mother, you can tell us!  Why can't father
write like that, I wonder?

Did he never hear from his own mother stories of giants and
fairies and princesses?

Has he forgotten them all?

Often when he gets late for his bath you have to go and call him
an hundred times.

You wait and keep his dishes warm for him, but he goes on writing
and forgets.

Father always plays at making books.

If ever I go to play in father's room, you come and call me,
"what a naughty child!"

If I make the slightest noise, you say, "Don't you see that
father's at his work?"

What's the fun of always writing and writing?

When I take up father's pen or pencil and write upon his book
just as he does,--a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i,--why do you get
cross with me, then, mother?

You never say a word when father writes.

When my father wastes such heaps of paper, mother, you don't seem
to mind at all.

But if I take only one sheet to make a boat with, you say,
"Child, how troublesome you are!"

What do you think of father's spoiling sheets and sheets of paper
with black marks all over on both sides?




THE WICKED POSTMAN


Why do you sit there on the floor so quiet and silent, tell me,
mother dear?

The rain is coming in through the open window, making you all
wet, and you don't mind it.

Do you hear the gong striking four?  It is time for my brother to
come home from school.

What has happened to you that you look so strange?

Haven't you got a letter from father to-day?

I saw the postman bringing letters in his bag for almost
everybody in the town.

Only, father's letters he keeps to read himself.  I am sure the
postman is a wicked man.

But don't be unhappy about that, mother dear.

To-morrow is market day in the next village.  You ask your maid
to buy some pens and papers.

I myself will write all father's letters; you will not find a
single mistake.

I shall write from A right up to K.

But, mother, why do you smile?

You don't believe that I can write as nicely as father does!

But I shall rule my paper carefully, and write all the letters
beautifully big.

When I finish my writing, do you think I shall be so foolish as
father and drop it into the horrid postman's bag?

I shall bring it to you myself without waiting, and letter by
letter help you to read my writing.

I know the postman does not like to give you the really nice
letters.




[Illustration: From a drawing by Nandalall Bose--see chero.jpg]


THE HERO


Mother, let us imagine we are travelling, and passing through a
strange and dangerous country.

You are riding in a palanquin and I am trotting by you on a red
horse.

It is evening and the sun goes down.  The waste of
_Joradighi_ lies wan and grey before us.  The land is
desolate and barren.

You are frightened and thinking--"I know not where we have come
to."

I say to you, "Mother, do not be afraid."

The meadow is prickly with spiky grass, and through it runs a
narrow broken path.

There are no cattle to be seen in the wide field; they have gone
to their village stalls.

It grows dark and dim on the land and sky, and we cannot tell
where we are going.

Suddenly you call me and ask me in a whisper, "What light is that
near the bank?"

Just then there bursts out a fearful yell, and figures come
running towards us.

You sit crouched in your palanquin and repeat the names of the
gods in prayer.

The bearers, shaking in terror, hide themselves in the thorny
bush.

I shout to you, "Don't be afraid, mother.  I am here."

With long sticks in their hands and hair all wild about their
heads, they come nearer and nearer.

I shout, "Have a care!  you villains!  One step more and you are
dead men."

They give another terrible yell and rush forward.

You clutch my hand and say, "Dear boy, for heaven's sake, keep
away from them."

I say, "Mother, just you watch me."

Then I spur my horse for a wild gallop, and my sword and buckler
clash against each other.

The fight becomes so fearful, mother, that it would give you a
cold shudder could you see it from your palanquin.

Many of them fly, and a great number are cut to pieces.

I know you are thinking, sitting all by yourself, that your boy
must be dead by this time.

But I come to you all stained with blood, and say, "Mother, the
fight is over now."

You come out and kiss me, pressing me to your heart, and you say
to yourself,

"I don't know what I should do if I hadn't my boy to escort me."

A thousand useless things happen day after day, and why couldn't
such a thing come true by chance?

It would be like a story in a book.

My brother would say, "Is it possible?  I always thought he was
so delicate!"

Our village people would all say in amazement, "Was it not lucky
that the boy was with his mother?"




THE END


It is time for me to go, mother; I am going.

When in the paling darkness of the lonely dawn you stretch out
your arms for your baby in the bed, I shall say, "Baby is not
there!"--mother, I am going.

I shall become a delicate draught of air and caress you; and I
shall be ripples in the water when you bathe, and kiss you and
kiss you again.

In the gusty night when the rain patters on the leaves you will
hear my whisper in your bed, and my laughter will flash with the
lightning through the open window into your room.

If you lie awake, thinking of your baby till late into the night,
I shall sing to you from the stars, "Sleep mother, sleep."

On the straying moonbeams I shall steal over your bed, and lie
upon your bosom while you sleep.

I shall become a dream, and through the little opening of your
eyelids I shall slip into the depths of your sleep; and when you
wake up and look round startled, like a twinkling firefly I shall
flit out into the darkness.

When, on the great festival of _puja_, the neighbours'
children come and play about the house, I shall melt into the
music of the flute and throb in your heart all day.

Dear auntie will come with _puja_-presents and will ask,
"Where is our baby, sister?  Mother, you will tell her softly,
"He is in the pupils of my eyes, he is in my body and in my
soul."




THE RECALL


The night was dark when she went away, and they slept.

The night is dark now, and I call for her, "Come back, my
darling; the world is asleep; and no one would know, if you came
for a moment while stars are gazing at stars."

She went away when the trees were in bud and the spring was
young.

Now the flowers are in high bloom and I call, "Come back, my
darling.  The children gather and scatter flowers in reckless
sport.  And if you come and take one little blossom no one will
miss it."

Those that used to play are playing still, so spendthrift is
life.

I listen to their chatter and call, "Come back, my darling, for
mother's heart is full to the brim with love, and if you come to
snatch only one little kiss from her no one will grudge it."




THE FIRST JASMINES


Ah, these jasmines, these white jasmines!

I seem to remember the first day when I filled my hands with
these jasmines, these white jasmines.

I have loved the sunlight, the sky and the green earth;

I have heard the liquid murmur of the river through the darkness
of midnight;

Autumn sunsets have come to me at the bend of a road in the
lonely waste, like a bride raising her veil to accept her lover.

Yet my memory is still sweet with the first white jasmines that I
held in my hand when I was a child.

Many a glad day has come in my life, and I have laughed with
merrymakers on festival nights.

On grey mornings of rain I have crooned many an idle song.

I have worn round my neck the evening wreath of _bakulas_
woven by the hand of love.

Yet my heart is sweet with the memory of the first fresh jasmines
that filled my hands when I was a child.




THE BANYAN TREE


O you shaggy-headed banyan tree standing on the bank of the pond,
have you forgotten the little child, like the birds that have
nested in your branches and left you?

Do you not remember how he sat at the window and wondered at the
tangle of your roots that plunged underground?

The women would come to fill their jars in the pond, and your
huge black shadow would wriggle on the water like sleep
struggling to wake up.

Sunlight danced on the ripples like restless tiny shuttles
weaving golden tapestry.

Two ducks swam by the weedy margin above their shadows, and the
child would sit still and think.

He longed to be the wind and blow through your rustling branches,
to be your shadow and lengthen with the day on the water, to be a
bird and perch on your top-most twig, and to float like those
ducks among the weeds and shadows.




[Illustration: From a drawing by Surendranath Ganguli--see
cbene.jpg]


BENEDICTION


Bless this little heart, this white soul that has won the kiss of
heaven for our earth.

He loves the light of the sun, he loves the sight of his mother's
face.

He has not learned to despise the dust, and to hanker after gold.

Clasp him to your heart and bless him.

He has come into this land of an hundred cross-roads.

I know not how he chose you from the crowd, came to your door,
and grasped your hand to ask his way.

He will follow you, laughing and talking, and not a doubt in his
heart.

Keep his trust, lead him straight and bless him.

Lay your hand on his head, and pray that though the waves
underneath grow threatening, yet the breath from above may come
and fill his sails and waft him to the haven of peace.

Forget him not in your hurry, let him come to your heart and
bless him.




THE GIFT


I want to give you something, my child, for we are drifting in
the stream of the world.

Our lives will be carried apart, and our love forgotten.

But I am not so foolish as to hope that I could buy your heart
with my gifts.

Young is your life, your path long, and you drink the love we
bring you at one draught and turn and run away from us.

You have your play and your playmates.  What harm is there if you
have no time or thought for us.

We, indeed, have leisure enough in old age to count the days that
are past, to cherish in our hearts what our hands have lost for
ever.

The river runs swift with a song, breaking through all barriers.
But the mountain stays and remembers, and follows her with his
love.




MY SONG


This song of mine will wind its music around you, my child, like
the fond arms of love.

This song of mine will touch your forehead like a kiss of
blessing.

When you are alone it will sit by your side and whisper in your
ear, when you are in the crowd it will fence you about with
aloofness.

My song will be like a pair of wings to your dreams, it will
transport your heart to the verge of the unknown.

It will be like the faithful star overhead when dark night is
over your road.

My song will sit in the pupils of your eyes, and will carry your
sight into the heart of things.

And when my voice is silent in death, my song will speak in your
living heart.




THE CHILD-ANGEL


They clamour and fight, they doubt and despair, they know no end
to their wranglings.

Let your life come amongst them like a flame of light, my child,
unflickering and pure, and delight them into silence.

They are cruel in their greed and their envy, their words are
like hidden knives thirsting for blood.

Go and stand amidst their scowling hearts, my child, and let your
gentle eyes fall upon them like the forgiving peace of the
evening over the strife of the day.

Let them see your face, my child, and thus know the meaning of
all things; let them love you and thus love each other.

Come and take your seat in the bosom of the limitless, my child.
At sunrise open and raise your heart like a blossoming flower,
and at sunset bend your head and in silence complete the worship
of the day.




THE LAST BARGAIN


"Come and hire me," I cried, while in the morning I was walking
on the stone-paved road.

Sword in hand, the King came in his chariot.

He held my hand and said, "I will hire you with my power."

But his power counted for nought, and he went away in his
chariot.

In the heat of the midday the houses stood with shut doors.

I wandered along the crooked lane.

An old man came out with his bag of gold.

He pondered and said, "I will hire you with my money."

He weighed his coins one by one, but I turned away.

It was evening.  The garden hedge was all aflower.

The fair maid came out and said, "I will hire you with a smile."

Her smile paled and melted into tears, and she went back alone
into the dark.

The sun glistened on the sand, and the sea waves broke waywardly.

A child sat playing with shells.

He raised his head and seemed to know me, and said, "I hire you
with nothing."

From thenceforward that bargain struck in child's play made me a
free man.




THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's The Crescent Moon, by Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CRESCENT MOON ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fruit-Gathering
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Fruit-Gathering

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6522]
                Most recently updated: December 29, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRUIT-GATHERING ***




Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred








Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred.
This eBook was produced by Chetan K. Jain.




Fruit-Gathering


By Rabindranath Tagore


[Translated from Bengali to English by the author]


New York: The Macmillan Company, 1916




I

Bid me and I shall gather my fruits to bring them in full baskets
into your courtyard, though some are lost and some not ripe.

For the season grows heavy with its fulness, and there is a
plaintive shepherd's pipe in the shade.

Bid me and I shall set sail on the river.

The March wind is fretful, fretting the languid waves into
murmurs.

The garden has yielded its all, and in the weary hour of evening
the call comes from your house on the shore in the sunset.



II

My life when young was like a flower--a flower that loosens a
petal or two from her abundance and never feels the loss when the
spring breeze comes to beg at her door.

Now at the end of youth my life is like a fruit, having nothing
to spare, and waiting to offer herself completely with her full
burden of sweetness.



III

Is summer's festival only for fresh blossoms and not also for
withered leaves and faded flowers?

Is the song of the sea in tune only with the rising waves?

Does it not also sing with the waves that fall?

Jewels are woven into the carpet where stands my king, but there
are patient clods waiting to be touched by his feet.

Few are the wise and the great who sit by my Master, but he has
taken the foolish in his arms and made me his servant for ever.



IV

I woke and found his letter with the morning.

I do not know what it says, for I cannot read.

I shall leave the wise man alone with his books, I shall not
trouble him, for who knows if he can read what the letter says.

Let me hold it to my forehead and press it to my heart.

When the night grows still and stars come out one by one I will
spread it on my lap and stay silent.

The rustling leaves will read it aloud to me, the rushing stream
will chant it, and the seven wise stars will sing it to me from
the sky.

I cannot find what I seek, I cannot understand what I would
learn; but this unread letter has lightened my burdens and turned
my thoughts into songs.



V

A handful of dust could hide your signal when I did not know its
meaning.

Now that I am wiser I read it in all that hid it before.

It is painted in petals of flowers; waves flash it from their
foam; hills hold it high on their summits.

I had my face turned from you, therefore I read the letters awry
and knew not their meaning.



VI

Where roads are made I lose my way.

In the wide water, in the blue sky there is no line of a track.

The pathway is hidden by the birds' wings, by the star-fires, by
the flowers of the wayfaring seasons.

And I ask my heart if its blood carries the wisdom of the unseen
way.



VII

Alas, I cannot stay in the house, and home has become no home to
me, for the eternal Stranger calls, he is going along the road.

The sound of his footfall knocks at my breast; it pains me!

The wind is up, the sea is moaning.  I leave all my cares and
doubts to follow the homeless tide, for the Stranger calls me, he
is going along the road.



VIII

Be ready to launch forth, my heart! and let those linger who
must.

For your name has been called in the morning sky.

Wait for none!

The desire of the bud is for the night and dew, but the blown
flower cries for the freedom of light.

Burst your sheath, my heart, and come forth!



IX

When I lingered among my hoarded treasure I felt like a worm that
feeds in the dark upon the fruit where it was born.

I leave this prison of decay.

I care not to haunt the mouldy stillness, for I go in search of
everlasting youth; I throw away all that is not one with my life
nor as light as my laughter.

I run through time and, O my heart, in your chariot dances the
poet who sings while he wanders.



X

You took my hand and drew me to your side, made me sit on the
high seat before all men, till I became timid, unable to stir and
walk my own way; doubting and debating at every step lest I
should tread upon any thorn of their disfavour.

I am freed at last!

The blow has come, the drum of insult sounded, my seat is laid
low in the dust.

My paths are open before me.

My wings are full of the desire of the sky.

I go to join the shooting stars of midnight, to plunge into the
profound shadow.

I am like the storm-driven cloud of summer that, having cast off
its crown of gold, hangs as a sword the thunderbolt upon a chain
of lightning.

In desperate joy I run upon the dusty path of the despised; I
draw near to your final welcome.

The child finds its mother when it leaves her womb.

When I am parted from you, thrown out from your household, I am
free to see your face.



XI

It decks me only to mock me, this jewelled chain of mine.

It bruises me when on my neck, it strangles me when I struggle to
tear it off.

It grips my throat, it chokes my singing.

Could I but offer it to your hand, my Lord, I would be saved.

Take it from me, and in exchange bind me to you with a garland,
for I am ashamed to stand before you with this jewelled chain on
my neck.



XII

Far below flowed the Jumna, swift and clear, above frowned the
jutting bank.

Hills dark with the woods and scarred with the torrents were
gathered around.

Govinda, the great Sikh teacher, sat on the rock reading
scriptures, when Raghunath, his disciple, proud of his wealth,
came and bowed to him and said, "I have brought my poor present
unworthy of your acceptance."

Thus saying he displayed before the teacher a pair of gold
bangles wrought with costly stones.

The master took up one of them, twirling it round his finger, and
the diamonds darted shafts of light.

Suddenly it slipped from his hand and rolled down the bank into
the water.

"Alas," screamed Raghunath, and jumped into the stream.

The teacher set his eyes upon his book, and the water held and
hid what it stole and went its way.

The daylight faded when Raghunath came back to the teacher tired
and dripping.

He panted and said, "I can still get it back if you show me where
it fell."

The teacher took up the remaining bangle and throwing it into the
water said, "It is there."



XIII

To move is to meet you every moment,
  Fellow-traveller!

It is to sing to the falling of your feet.

He whom your breath touches does not glide by the shelter of the
bank.

He spreads a reckless sail to the wind and rides the turbulent
water.

He who throws his doors open and steps onward receives your
greeting.

He does not stay to count his gain or to mourn his loss; his
heart beats the drum for his march, for that is to march with you
every step,

    Fellow-traveller!



XIV

My portion of the best in this world will come from your hands:
such was your promise.

Therefore your light glistens in my tears.

I fear to be led by others lest I miss you waiting in some road
corner to be my guide.

I walk my own wilful way till my very folly tempts you to my
door.

For I have your promise that my portion of the best in this world
will come from your hands.



XV

Your speech is simple, my Master, but not theirs who talk of you.

I understand the voice of your stars and the silence of your
trees.

I know that my heart would open like a flower; that my life has
filled itself at a hidden fountain.

Your songs, like birds from the lonely land of snow, are winging
to build their nests in my heart against the warmth of its April,
and I am content to wait for the merry season.



XVI

They knew the way and went to seek you along the narrow lane, but
I wandered abroad into the night for I was ignorant.

I was not schooled enough to be afraid of you in the dark,
therefore I came upon your doorstep unaware.

The wise rebuked me and bade me be gone, for I had not come by
the lane.

I turned away in doubt, but you held me fast, and their scolding
became louder every day.



XVII

I brought out my earthen lamp from my house and cried, "Come,
children, I will light your path!"

The night was still dark when I returned, leaving the road to its
silence, crying, "Light me, O Fire! for my earthen lamp lies
broken in the dust!"



XVIII

No: it is not yours to open buds into blossoms.

Shake the bud, strike it; it is beyond your power to make it
blossom.

Your touch soils it, you tear its petals to pieces and strew them
in the dust.

But no colours appear, and no perfume.

Ah! it is not for you to open the bud into a blossom.

He who can open the bud does it so simply.

He gives it a glance, and the life-sap stirs through its veins.

At his breath the flower spreads its wings and flutters in the
wind.

Colours flush out like heart-longings, the perfume betrays a
sweet secret.

He who can open the bud does it so simply.



XIX

Sudâs, the gardener, plucked from his tank the last lotus left by
the ravage of winter and went to sell it to the king at the
palace gate.

There he met a traveller who said to him, "Ask your price for the
last lotus,--I shall offer it to Lord Buddha."

Sudâs said, "If you pay one golden _mâshâ_ it will be yours."

The traveller paid it.

At that moment the king came out and he wished to buy the flower,
for he was on his way to see Lord Buddha, and he thought, "It
would be a fine thing to lay at his feet the lotus that bloomed
in winter."

When the gardener said he had been offered a golden mâshâ the
king offered him ten, but the traveller doubled the price.

The gardener, being greedy, imagined a greater gain from him for
whose sake they were bidding.  He bowed and said, "I cannot sell
this lotus."

In the hushed shade of the mango grove beyond the city wall Sudâs
stood before Lord Buddha, on whose lips sat the silence of love
and whose eyes beamed peace like the morning star of the
dew-washed autumn.

Sudâs looked in his face and put the lotus at his feet and bowed
his head to the dust.

Buddha smiled and asked, "What is your wish, my son?"

Sudâs cried, "The least touch of your feet."



XX

Make me thy poet, O Night, veiled Night!

There are some who have sat speechless for ages in thy shadow;
let me utter their songs.

Take me up on thy chariot without wheels, running noiselessly
from world to world, thou queen in the palace of time, thou
darkly beautiful!

Many a questioning mind has stealthily entered thy courtyard and
roamed through thy lampless house seeking for answers.

From many a heart, pierced with the arrow of joy from the hands
of the Unknown, have burst forth glad chants, shaking the
darkness to its foundation.

Those wakeful souls gaze in the starlight in wonder at the
treasure they have suddenly found.

Make me their poet, O Night, the poet of thy fathomless silence.



XXI

I will meet one day the Life within me, the joy that hides in my
life, though the days perplex my path with their idle dust.

I have known it in glimpses, and its fitful breath has come upon
me, making my thoughts fragrant for a while.

I will meet one day the Joy without me that dwells behind the
screen of light--and will stand in the overflowing solitude where
all things are seen as by their creator.



XXII

This autumn morning is tired with excess of light, and if your
songs grow fitful and languid give me your flute awhile.

I shall but play with it as the whim takes me,--now take it on my
lap, now touch it with my lips, now keep it by my side on the
grass.

But in the solemn evening stillness I shall gather flowers, to
deck it with wreaths, I shall fill it with fragrance; I shall
worship it with the lighted lamp.

Then at night I shall come to you and give you back your flute.

You will play on it the music of midnight when the lonely
crescent moon wanders among the stars.



XXIII

The poet's mind floats and dances on the waves of life amidst the
voices of wind and water.

Now when the sun has set and the darkened sky draws upon the sea
like drooping lashes upon a weary eye it is time to take away his
pen, and let his thoughts sink into the bottom of the deep amid
the eternal secret of that silence.



XXIV

The night is dark and your slumber is deep in the hush of my
being.

Wake, O Pain of Love, for I know not how to open the door, and I
stand outside.

The hours wait, the stars watch, the wind is still, the silence
is heavy in my heart.

Wake, Love, wake! brim my empty cup, and with a breath of song
ruffle the night.



XXV

The bird of the morning sings.

Whence has he word of the morning before the morning breaks, and
when the dragon night still holds the sky in its cold black
coils?

Tell me, bird of the morning, how, through the twofold night of
the sky and the leaves, he found his way into your dream, the
messenger out of the east?

The world did not believe you when you cried, "The sun is on his
way, the night is no more."

O sleeper, awake!

Bare your forehead, waiting for the first blessing of light, and
sing with the bird of the morning in glad faith.



XXVI

The beggar in me lifted his lean hands to the starless sky and
cried into night's ear with his hungry voice.

His prayers were to the blind Darkness who lay like a fallen god
in a desolate heaven of lost hopes.

The cry of desire eddied round a chasm of despair, a wailing bird
circling its empty nest.

But when morning dropped anchor at the rim of the East, the
beggar in me leapt and cried:

"Blessed am I that the deaf night denied me--that its coffer was
empty."

He cried, "O Life, O Light, you are precious! and precious is the
joy that at last has known you!"



XXVII

Sanâtan was telling his beads by the Ganges when a Brahmin in
rags came to him and said, "Help me, I am poor!"

"My alms-bowl is all that is my own," said Sanâtan, "I have given
away everything I had."

"But my lord Shiva came to me in my dreams," said the Brahmin,
"and counselled me to come to you."

Sanâtan suddenly remembered he had picked up a stone without
price among the pebbles on the river-bank, and thinking that some
one might need it hid it in the sands.

He pointed out the spot to the Brahmin, who wondering dug up the
stone.

The Brahmin sat on the earth and mused alone till the sun went
down behind the trees, and cowherds went home with their cattle.

Then he rose and came slowly to Sanâtan and said, "Master, give
me the least fraction of the wealth that disdains all the wealth
of the world."

And he threw the precious stone into the water.



XXVIII

Time after time I came to your gate with raised hands, asking for
more and yet more.

You gave and gave, now in slow measure, now in sudden excess.

I took some, and some things I let drop; some lay heavy on my
hands; some I made into playthings and broke them when tired;
till the wrecks and the hoard of your gifts grew immense, hiding
you, and the ceaseless expectation wore my heart out.

Take, oh take--has now become my cry.

Shatter all from this beggar's bowl: put out this lamp of the
importunate watcher: hold my hands, raise me from the
still-gathering heap of your gifts into the bare infinity of
your uncrowded presence.



XXIX

You have set me among those who are defeated.

I know it is not for me to win, nor to leave the game.

I shall plunge into the pool although but to sink to the bottom.

I shall play the game of my undoing.

I shall stake all I have and when I lose my last penny I shall
stake myself, and then I think I shall have won through my utter
defeat.



XXX

A smile of mirth spread over the sky when you dressed my heart in
rags and sent her forth into the road to beg.

She went from door to door, and many a time when her bowl was
nearly full she was robbed.

At the end of the weary day she came to your palace gate holding
up her pitiful bowl, and you came and took her hand and seated
her beside you on your throne.



XXXI

"Who among you will take up the duty of feeding the hungry?"
Lord Buddha asked his followers when famine raged at Shravasti.

Ratnâkar, the banker, hung his head and said, "Much more is
needed than all my wealth to feed the hungry."

Jaysen, the chief of the King's army, said, "I would gladly give
my life's blood, but there is not enough food in my house."

Dharmapâal, who owned broad acres of land, said with a sigh, "The
drought demon has sucked my fields dry.  I know not how to pay
King's dues."

Then rose Supriyâ, the mendicant's daughter.

She bowed to all and meekly said, "I will feed the hungry."

"How!"  they cried in surprise.  "How can you hope to fulfil that
vow?"

"I am the poorest of you all," said Supriyâ, "that is my
strength.  I have my coffer and my store at each of your houses."



XXXII

My king was unknown to me, therefore when he claimed his tribute
I was bold to think I would hide myself leaving my debts unpaid.

I fled and fled behind my day's work and my night's dreams.

But his claims followed me at every breath I drew.

Thus I came to know that I am known to him and no place left
which is mine.

Now I wish to lay my all before his feet, and gain the right to
my place in his kingdom.



XXXIII

When I thought I would mould you, an image from my life for men
to worship, I brought my dust and desires and all my coloured
delusions and dreams.

When I asked you to mould with my life an image from your heart
for you to love, you brought your fire and force, and truth,
loveliness and peace.



XXXIV

"Sire," announced the servant to the King, "the saint Narottam
has never deigned to enter your royal temple.

"He is singing God's praise under the trees by the open road.
The temple is empty of worshippers.

"They flock round him like bees round the white lotus, leaving
the golden jar of honey unheeded."

The King, vexed at heart, went to the spot where Narottam sat on
the grass.

He asked him, "Father, why leave my temple of the golden dome and
sit on the dust outside to preach God's love?"

"Because God is not there in your temple," said Narottam.

The King frowned and said, "Do you know, twenty millions of gold
went to the making of that marvel of art, and it was consecrated
to God with costly rites?"

"Yes, I know it," answered Narottam.  "It was in that year when
thousands of your people whose houses had been burned stood
vainly asking for help at your door.

"And God said, 'The poor creature who can give no shelter to his
brothers would build my house!'

"And he took his place with the shelterless under the trees by
the road.

"And that golden bubble is empty of all but hot vapour of pride."

The King cried in anger, "Leave my land."

Calmly said the saint, "Yes, banish me where you have banished my
God."



XXXV

The trumpet lies in the dust.

The wind is weary, the light is dead.

Ah, the evil day!

Come, fighters, carrying your flags, and singers, with your
war-songs!

Come, pilgrims of the march, hurrying on your journey!

The trumpet lies in the dust waiting for us.

I was on my way to the temple with my evening offerings, seeking
for a place of rest after the day's dusty toil: hoping my hurts
would be healed and the stains in my garment washed white, when I
found thy trumpet lying in the dust.

Was it not the hour for me to light my evening lamp?

Had not the night sung its lullaby to the stars?

O thou blood-red rose, my poppies of sleep have paled and faded!

I was certain my wanderings were over and my debts all paid when
suddenly I came upon thy trumpet lying in the dust.

Strike my drowsy heart with thy spell of youth!

Let my joy in life blaze up in fire.  Let the shafts of awakening
fly through the heart of night, and a thrill of dread shake
blindness and palsy.

I have come to raise thy trumpet from the dust.

Sleep is no more for me--my walk shall be through showers of
arrows.

Some shall run out of their houses and come to my side--some
shall weep.

Some in their beds shall toss and groan in dire dreams.

For to-night thy trumpet shall be sounded.

From thee I have asked peace only to find shame.

Now I stand before thee--help me to put on my armour!

Let hard blows of trouble strike fire into my life.

Let my heart beat in pain, the drum of thy victory.

My hands shall be utterly emptied to take up thy trumpet.



XXXVI

When, mad in their mirth, they raised dust to soil thy robe, O
Beautiful, it made my heart sick.

I cried to thee and said, "Take thy rod of punishment and judge
them."

The morning light struck upon those eyes, red with the revel of
night; the place of the white lily greeted their burning breath;
the stars through the depth of the sacred dark stared at their
carousing--at those that raised dust to soil thy robe, O
Beautiful!

Thy judgment seat was in the flower garden, in the birds' notes
in springtime: in the shady river-banks, where the trees muttered
in answer to the muttering of the waves.

O my Lover, they were pitiless in their passion.

They prowled in the dark to snatch thy ornaments to deck their
own desires.

When they had struck thee and thou wert pained, it pierced me to
the quick, and I cried to thee and said, "Take thy sword, O my
Lover, and judge them!"

Ah, but thy justice was vigilant.

A mother's tears were shed on their insolence; the imperishable
faith of a lover hid their spears of rebellion in its own wounds.

Thy judgment was in the mute pain of sleepless love: in the blush
of the chaste: in the tears of the night of the desolate: in the
pale morning-light of forgiveness.

O Terrible, they in their reckless greed climbed thy gate at
night, breaking into thy storehouse to rob thee.

But the weight of their plunder grew immense, too heavy to carry
or to remove.

Thereupon I cried to thee and said, Forgive them, O Terrible!

Thy forgiveness burst in storms, throwing them down, scattering
their thefts in the dust.

Thy forgiveness was in the thunder-stone; in the shower of blood;
in the angry red of the sunset.



XXXVII

Upagupta, the disciple of Buddha, lay asleep on the dust by the
city wall of Mathura.

Lamps were all out, doors were all shut, and stars were all
hidden by the murky sky of August.

Whose feet were those tinkling with anklets, touching his breast
of a sudden?

He woke up startled, and the light from a woman's lamp struck his
forgiving eyes.

It was the dancing girl, starred with jewels, clouded with a
pale-blue mantle, drunk with the wine of her youth.

She lowered her lamp and saw the young face, austerely beautiful.

"Forgive me, young ascetic," said the woman; "graciously come to
my house.  The dusty earth is not a fit bed for you."

The ascetic answered, "Woman, go on your way; when the time is
ripe I will come to you."

Suddenly the black night showed its teeth in a flash of
lightning.

The storm growled from the corner of the sky, and the woman
trembled in fear.

......

The branches of the wayside trees were aching with blossom.

Gay notes of the flute came floating in the warm spring air from
afar.

The citizens had gone to the woods, to the festival of flowers.

From the mid-sky gazed the full moon on the shadows of the silent
town.

The young ascetic was walking in the lonely street, while
overhead the lovesick _koels_ urged from the mango branches
their sleepless plaint.

Upagupta passed through the city gates, and stood at the base of
the rampart.

What woman lay in the shadow of the wall at his feet, struck with
the black pestilence, her body spotted with sores, hurriedly
driven away from the town?

The ascetic sat by her side, taking her head on his knees, and
moistened her lips with water and smeared her body with balm.

"Who are you, merciful one?"  asked the woman.

"The time, at last, has come to visit you, and I am here,"
replied the young ascetic.



XXXVIII

This is no mere dallying of love between us, my lover.

Again and again have swooped down upon me the screaming nights of
storm, blowing out my lamp: dark doubts have gathered, blotting
out all stars from my sky.

Again and again the banks have burst, letting the flood sweep
away my harvest, and wailing and despair have rent my sky from
end to end.

This have I learnt that there are blows of pain in your love,
never the cold apathy of death.



XXXIX

The wall breaks asunder, light, like divine laughter, bursts in.
Victory, O Light!

The heart of the night is pierced!

With your flashing sword cut in twain the tangle of doubt and
feeble desires!

Victory!

Come, Implacable!

Come, you who are terrible in your whiteness.

O Light, your drum sounds in the march of fire, and the red torch
is held on high; death dies in a burst of splendour!



XL

O fire, my brother, I sing victory to you.

You are the bright red image of fearful freedom.

You swing your arms in the sky, you sweep your impetuous fingers
across the harp-string, your dance music is beautiful.

When my days are ended and the gates are opened you will burn to
ashes this cordage of hands and feet.

My body will be one with you, my heart will be caught in the
whirls of your frenzy, and the burning heat that was my life will
flash up and mingle itself in your flame.



XLI

The Boatman is out crossing the wild sea at night.

The mast is aching because of its full sails filled with the
violent wind.

Stung with the night's fang the sky falls upon the sea, poisoned
with black fear.

The waves dash their heads against the dark unseen, and the
Boatman is out crossing the wild sea.

The Boatman is out, I know not for what tryst, startling the
night with the sudden white of his sails.

I know not at what shore, at last, he lands to reach the silent
courtyard where the lamp is burning and to find her who sits in
the dust and waits.

What is the quest that makes his boat care not for storm nor
darkness?

Is it heavy with gems and pearls?

Ah, no, the Boatman brings with him no treasure, but only a white
rose in his hand and a song on his lips.

It is for her who watches alone at night with her lamp burning.

She dwells in the wayside hut.  Her loose hair flies in the wind
and hides her eyes.

The storm shrieks through her broken doors, the light flickers in
her earthen lamp flinging shadows on the walls.

Through the howl of the winds she hears him call her name, she
whose name is unknown.

It is long since the Boatman sailed.  It will be long before the
day breaks and he knocks at the door.

The drums will not be beaten and none will know.

Only light shall fill the house, blessed shall be the dust, and
the heart glad.

All doubts shall vanish in silence when the Boatman comes to the
shore.



XLII

I cling to this living raft, my body, in the narrow stream of my
earthly years.

I leave it when the crossing is over.  And then?

I do not know if the light there and the darkness are the same.

The Unknown is the perpetual freedom:

He is pitiless in his love.

He crushes the shell for the pearl, dumb in the prison of the
dark.

You muse and weep for the days that are done, poor heart!

Be glad that days are to come!

The hour strikes, O pilgrim!

It is time for you to take the parting of the ways!

His face will be unveiled once again and you shall meet.



XLIII

Over the relic of Lord Buddha King Bimbisâr built a shrine, a
salutation in white marble.

There in the evening would come all the brides and daughters of
the King's house to offer flowers and light lamps.

When the son became king in his time he washed his father's creed
away with blood, and lit sacrificial fires with its sacred books.

The autumn day was dying.  The evening hour of worship was near.

Shrimati, the queen's maid, devoted to Lord Buddha, having bathed
in holy water, and decked the golden tray with lamps and fresh
white blossoms, silently raised her dark eyes to the queen's
face.

The queen shuddered in fear and said, "Do you not know, foolish
girl, that death is the penalty for whoever brings worship to
Buddha's shrine?

"Such is the king's will."

Shrimati bowed to the queen, and turning away from her door came
and stood before Amitâ, the newly wed bride of the king's son.

A mirror of burnished gold on her lap, the newly wed bride was
braiding her dark long tresses and painting the red spot of good
luck at the parting of her hair.

Her hands trembled when she saw the young maid, and she cried,
"What fearful peril would you bring me! Leave me this instant."

Princess Shuklâ sat at the window reading her book of romance by
the light of the setting sun.

She started when she saw at her door the maid with the sacred
offerings.

Her book fell down from her lap, and she whispered in Shrimati's
ears, "Rush not to death, daring woman!"

Shrimati walked from door to door.  She raised her head and
cried, "O women of the king's house, hasten!

"The time for our Lord's worship is come!"

Some shut their doors in her face and some reviled her.

The last gleam of daylight faded from the bronze dome of the
palace tower.

Deep shadows settled in street corners: the bustle of the city
was hushed: the gong at the temple of Shiva announced the time of
the evening prayer.

In the dark of the autumn evening, deep as a limpid lake, stars
throbbed with light, when the guards of the palace garden were
startled to see through the trees a row of lamps burning at the
shrine of Buddha.

They ran with their swords unsheathed, crying, "Who are you,
foolish one, reckless of death?"

"I am Shrimati," replied a sweet voice, "the servant of Lord
Buddha."

The next moment her heart's blood coloured the cold marble with
its red.

And in the still hour of stars died the light of the last lamp of
worship at the foot of the shrine.



XLIV

The day that stands between you and me makes her last bow of
farewell.

The night draws her veil over her face, and hides the one lamp
burning in my chamber.

Your dark servant comes noiselessly and spreads the bridal carpet
for you to take your seat there alone with me in the wordless
silence till night is done.



XLV

My night has passed on the bed of sorrow, and my eyes are tired.
My heavy heart is not yet ready to meet morning with its crowded
joys.

Draw a veil over this naked light, beckon aside from me this
glaring flash and dance of life.

Let the mantle of tender darkness cover me in its folds, and
cover my pain awhile from the pressure of the world.



XLVI

The time is past when I could repay her for all that I received.

Her night has found its morning and thou hast taken her to thy
arms: and to thee I bring my gratitude and my gifts that were for
her.

For all hurts and offences to her I come to thee for forgiveness.

I offer to thy service those flowers of my love that remained in
bud when she waited for them to open.



XLVII

I found a few old letters of mine carefully hidden in her box--a
few small toys for her memory to play with.

With a timorous heart she tried to steal these trifles from
time's turbulent stream, and said, "These are mine only!"

Ah, there is no one now to claim them, who can pay their price
with loving care, yet here they are still.

Surely there is love in this world to save her from utter loss,
even like this love of hers that saved these letters with such
fond care.



XLVIII

Bring beauty and order into my forlorn life, woman, as you
brought them into my house when you lived.

Sweep away the dusty fragments of the hours, fill the empty jars,
and mend all that has been neglected.

Then open the inner door of the shrine, light the candle, and let
us meet there in silence before our God.



XLIX

The pain was great when the strings were being tuned, my Master!

Begin your music, and let me forget the pain; let me feel in
beauty what you had in your mind through those pitiless days.

The waning night lingers at my doors, let her take her leave in
songs.

Pour your heart into my life strings, my Master, in tunes that
descend from your stars.



L

In the lightning flash of a moment I have seen the immensity of
your creation in my life--creation through many a death from
world to world.

I weep at my unworthiness when I see my life in the hands of the
unmeaning hours,--but when I see it in your hands I know it is
too precious to be squandered among shadows.



LI

I know that at the dim end of some day the sun will bid me its
farewell.

Shepherds will play their pipes beneath the banyan trees, and
cattle graze on the slope by the river, while my days will pass
into the dark.

This is my prayer, that I may know before I leave why the earth
called me to her arms.

Why her night's silence spoke to me of stars, and her daylight
kissed my thoughts into flower.

Before I go may I linger over my last refrain, completing its
music, may the lamp be lit to see your face and the wreath woven
to crown you.



LII

What music is that in whose measure the world is rocked?

We laugh when it beats upon the crest of life, we shrink in
terror when it returns into the dark.

But the play is the same that comes and goes with the rhythm of
the endless music.

You hide your treasure in the palm of your hand, and we cry that
we are robbed.

But open and shut your palm as you will, the gain and the loss
are the same.

At the game you play with your own self you lose and win at once.



LIII

I have kissed this world with my eyes and my limbs; I have wrapt
it within my heart in numberless folds; I have flooded its days
and nights with thoughts till the world and my life have grown
one,--and I love my life because I love the light of the sky so
enwoven with me.

If to leave this world be as real as to love it--then there must
be a meaning in the meeting and the parting of life.

If that love were deceived in death, then the canker of this
deceit would eat into all things, and the stars would shrivel and
grow black.



LIV

The Cloud said to me, "I vanish"; the Night said, "I plunge into
the fiery dawn."

The Pain said, "I remain in deep silence as his footprint."

"I die into the fulness," said my life to me.

The Earth said, "My lights kiss your thoughts every moment."

"The days pass," Love said, "but I wait for you."

Death said, "I ply the boat of your life across the sea."



LV

Tulsidas, the poet, was wandering, deep in thought, by the
Ganges, in that lonely spot where they burn their dead.

He found a woman sitting at the feet of the corpse of her dead
husband, gaily dressed as for a wedding.

She rose as she saw him, bowed to him, and said, "Permit me,
Master, with your blessing, to follow my husband to heaven."

"Why such hurry, my daughter?"  asked Tulsidas.  "Is not this
earth also His who made heaven?"

"For heaven I do not long," said the woman.  "I want my husband."

Tulsidas smiled and said to her, "Go back to your home, my child.
Before the month is over you will find your husband."

The woman went back with glad hope.  Tulsidas came to her every
day and gave her high thoughts to think, till her heart was
filled to the brim with divine love.

When the month was scarcely over, her neighbours came to her,
asking, "Woman, have you found your husband?"

The widow smiled and said, "I have."

Eagerly they asked, "Where is he?"

"In my heart is my lord, one with me," said the woman.



LVI

You came for a moment to my side and touched me with the great
mystery of the woman that there is in the heart of creation.

She who is ever returning to God his own outflowing of
sweetness; she is the ever fresh beauty and youth in nature; she
dances in the bubbling streams and sings in the morning light;
she with heaving waves suckles the thirsty earth; in her the
Eternal One breaks in two in a joy that no longer may contain
itself, and overflows in the pain of love.



LVII

Who is she who dwells in my heart, the woman forlorn for ever?

I wooed her and I failed to win her.  I decked her with wreaths
and sang in her praise.

A smile shone in her face for a moment, then it faded.

"I have no joy in thee," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I bought her jewelled anklets and fanned her with a fan
gem-studded; I made her a bed on a bedstead of gold.

There flickered a gleam of gladness in her eyes, then it died.

"I have no joy in these," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I seated her upon a car of triumph and drove her from end to end
of the earth.

Conquered hearts bowed down at her feet, and shouts of applause
rang in the sky.

Pride shone in her eyes for a moment, then it was dimmed in
tears.

"I have no joy in conquest," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I asked her, "Tell me whom do you seek?"

She only said, "I wait for him of the unknown name."

Days pass by and she cries, "When will my beloved come whom I
know not, and be known to me for ever?"



LVIII

Yours is the light that breaks forth from the dark, and the good
that sprouts from the cleft heart of strife.

Yours is the house that opens upon the world, and the love that
calls to the battlefield.

Yours is the gift that still is a gain when everything is a loss,
and the life that flows through the caverns of death.

Yours is the heaven that lies in the common dust, and you are
there for me, you are there for all.



LIX

When the weariness of the road is upon me, and the thirst of the
sultry day; when the ghostly hours of the dusk throw their
shadows across my life, then I cry not for your voice only, my
friend, but for your touch.

There is an anguish in my heart for the burden of its riches not
given to you.

Put out your hand through the night, let me hold it and fill it
and keep it; let me feel its touch along the lengthening stretch
of my loneliness.



LX

The odour cries in the bud, "Ah me, the day departs, the happy
day of spring, and I am a prisoner in petals!"

Do not lose heart, timid thing! Your bonds will burst, the bud
will open into flower, and when you die in the fulness of life,
even then the spring will live on.

The odour pants and flutters within the bud, crying, "Ah me, the
hours pass by, yet I do not know where I go, or what it is I
seek!"

Do not lose heart, timid thing! The spring breeze has overheard
your desire, the day will not end before you have fulfilled your
being.

Dark is the future to her, and the odour cries in despair, "Ah
me, through whose fault is my life so unmeaning?

"Who can tell me, why I am at all?"  Do not lose heart, timid
thing! The perfect dawn is near when you will mingle your life
with all life and know at last your purpose.



LXI

She is still a child, my lord.

She runs about your palace and plays, and tries to make of you a
plaything as well.

She heeds not when her hair tumbles down and her careless garment
drags in the dust.

She falls asleep when you speak to her and answers not--and the
flower you give her in the morning slips to the dust from her
hands.

When the storm bursts and darkness is over the sky she is
sleepless; her dolls lie scattered on the earth and she clings to
you in terror.

She is afraid that she may fail in service to you.

But with a smile you watch her at her game.

You know her.

The child sitting in the dust is your destined bride; her play
will be stilled and deepened into love.



LXII

"What is there but the sky, O Sun, that can hold thine image?"

"I dream of thee, but to serve thee I can never hope," the
dewdrop wept and said, "I am too small to take thee unto me,
great lord, and my life is all tears."

"I illumine the limitless sky, yet I can yield myself up to a
tiny drop of dew," thus the Sun said; "I shall become but a
sparkle of light and fill you, and your little life will be a
laughing orb."



LXIII

Not for me is the love that knows no restraint, but like the
foaming wine that having burst its vessel in a moment would run
to waste.

Send me the love which is cool and pure like your rain that
blesses the thirsty earth and fills the homely earthen jars.

Send me the love that would soak down into the centre of being,
and from there would spread like the unseen sap through the
branching tree of life, giving birth to fruits and flowers.

Send me the love that keeps the heart still with the fulness of
peace.



LXIV

The sun had set on the western margin of the river among the
tangle of the forest.

The hermit boys had brought the cattle home, and sat round the
fire to listen to the master, Guatama, when a strange boy came,
and greeted him with fruits and flowers, and, bowing low at his
feet, spoke in a bird-like voice--"Lord, I have come to thee to
be taken into the path of the supreme Truth.

"My name is Satyakâma."

"Blessings be on thy head," said the master.

"Of what clan art thou, my child? It is only fitting for a
Brahmin to aspire to the highest wisdom."

"Master," answered the boy, "I know not of what clan I am.  I
shall go and ask my mother."

Thus saying, Satyakâma took leave, and wading across the
shallow stream, came back to his mother's hut, which stood at the
end of the sandy waste at the edge of the sleeping village.

The lamp burnt dimly in the room, and the mother stood at the
door in the dark waiting for her son's return.

She clasped him to her bosom, kissed him on his hair, and asked
him of his errand to the master.

"What is the name of my father, dear mother?"  asked the boy.

"It is only fitting for a Brahmin to aspire to the highest
wisdom, said Lord Guatama to me."

The woman lowered her eyes, and spoke in a whisper.

"In my youth I was poor and had many masters.  Thou didst come to
thy mother Jabâlâ's arms, my darling, who had no husband."

The early rays of the sun glistened on the tree-tops of the
forest hermitage.

The students, with their tangled hair still wet with their
morning bath, sat under the ancient tree, before the master.

There came Satyakâma.

He bowed low at the feet of the sage, and stood silent.

"Tell me," the great teacher asked him, "of what clan art thou?"

"My lord," he answered, "I know it not.  My mother said when I
asked her, 'I had served many masters in my youth, and thou hadst
come to thy mother Jabâlâ's arms, who had no husband.'"

There rose a murmur like the angry hum of bees disturbed in their
hive; and the students muttered at the shameless insolence of
that outcast.

Master Guatama rose from his seat, stretched out his arms, took
the boy to his bosom, and said, "Best of all Brahmins art thou,
my child.  Thou hast the noblest heritage of truth."



LXV

May be there is one house in this city where the gate opens for
ever this morning at the touch of the sunrise, where the errand
of the light is fulfilled.

The flowers have opened in hedges and gardens, and may be there
is one heart that has found in them this morning the gift that
has been on its voyage from endless time.



LXVI

Listen, my heart, in his flute is the music of the smell of wild
flowers, of the glistening leaves and gleaming water, of shadows
resonant with bees' wings.

The flute steals his smile from my friend's lips and spreads it
over my life.



LXVII

You always stand alone beyond the stream of my songs.

The waves of my tunes wash your feet but I know not how to reach
them.

This play of mine with you is a play from afar.

It is the pain of separation that melts into melody through my
flute.

I wait for the time when your boat crosses over to my shore and
you take my flute into your own hands.



LXVIII

Suddenly the window of my heart flew open this morning, the
window that looks out on your heart.

I wondered to see that the name by which you know me is written
in April leaves and flowers, and I sat silent.

The curtain was blown away for a moment between my songs and
yours.

I found that your morning light was full of my own mute songs
unsung; I thought that I would learn them at your feet--and I sat
silent.



LXIX

You were in the centre of my heart, therefore when my heart
wandered she never found you; you hid yourself from my loves and
hopes till the last, for you were always in them.

You were the inmost joy in the play of my youth, and when I was
too busy with the play the joy was passed by.

You sang to me in the ecstasies of my life and I forgot to sing
to you.



LXX

When you hold your lamp in the sky it throws its light on my face
and its shadow falls over you.

When I hold the lamp of love in my heart its light falls on you
and I am left standing behind in the shadow.



LXXI

O the waves, the sky-devouring waves, glistening with light,
dancing with life, the waves of eddying joy, rushing for ever.

The stars rock upon them, thoughts of every tint are cast up out
of the deep and scattered on the beach of life.

Birth and death rise and fall with their rhythm, and the sea-gull
of my heart spreads its wings crying in delight.



LXXII

The joy ran from all the world to build my body.

The lights of the skies kissed and kissed her till she woke.

Flowers of hurrying summers sighed in her breath and voices of
winds and water sang in her movements.

The passion of the tide of colours in clouds and in forests
flowed into her life, and the music of all things caressed her
limbs into shape.

She is my bride,--she has lighted her lamp in my house.



LXXIII

The spring with its leaves and flowers has come into my body.

The bees hum there the morning long, and the winds idly play with
the shadows.

A sweet fountain springs up from the heart of my heart.

My eyes are washed with delight like the dew-bathed morning, and
life is quivering in all my limbs like the sounding strings of
the lute.

Are you wandering alone by the shore of my life, where the tide
is in flood, O lover of my endless days?

Are my dreams flitting round you like the moths with their
many-coloured wings?

And are those your songs that are echoing in the dark eaves of my
being?

Who but you can hear the hum of the crowded hours that sounds in
my veins to-day, the glad steps that dance in my breast, the
clamour of the restless life beating its wings in my body?



LXXIV

My bonds are cut, my debts are paid, my door has been opened, I
go everywhere.

They crouch in their corner and weave their web of pale hours,
they count their coins sitting in the dust and call me back.

But my sword is forged, my armour is put on, my horse is eager to
run.

I shall win my kingdom.



LXXV

It was only the other day that I came to your earth, naked and
nameless, with a wailing cry.

To-day my voice is glad, while you, my lord, stand aside to make
room that I may fill my life.

Even when I bring you my songs for an offering I have the secret
hope that men will come and love me for them.

You love to discover that I love this world where you have
brought me.



LXXVI

Timidly I cowered in the shadow of safety, but now, when the
surge of joy carries my heart upon its crest, my heart clings to
the cruel rock of its trouble.

I sat alone in a corner of my house thinking it too narrow for
any guest, but now when its door is flung open by an unbidden joy
I find there is room for thee and for all the world.

I walked upon tiptoe, careful of my person, perfumed, and
adorned--but now when a glad whirlwind has overthrown me in the
dust I laugh and roll on the earth at thy feet like a child.



LXXVII

The world is yours at once and for ever.

And because you have no want, my king, you have no pleasure in
your wealth.

It is as though it were naught.  Therefore through slow time you
give me what is yours, and ceaselessly win your kingdom in me.

Day after day you buy your sunrise from my heart, and you find
your love carven into the image of my life.



LXXVIII

To the birds you gave songs, the birds gave you songs in return.

You gave me only voice, yet asked for more, and I sing.

You made your winds light and they are fleet in their service.
You burdened my hands that I myself may lighten them, and at
last, gain unburdened freedom for your service.

You created your Earth filling its shadows with fragments of
light.

There you paused; you left me empty-handed in the dust to create
your heaven.

To all things else you give; from me you ask.

The harvest of my life ripens in the sun and the shower till I
reap more than you sowed, gladdening your heart, O Master of the
golden granary.



LXXIX

Let me not pray to be sheltered from dangers but to be fearless
in facing them.

Let me not beg for the stilling of my pain but for the heart to
conquer it.

Let me not look for allies in life's battlefield but to my own
strength.

Let me not crave in anxious fear to be saved but hope for the
patience to win my freedom.

Grant me that I may not be a coward, feeling your mercy in my
success alone; but let me find the grasp of your hand in my
failure.



LXXX

You did not know yourself when you dwelt alone, and there was no
crying of an errand when the wind ran from the hither to the
farther shore.

I came and you woke, and the skies blossomed with lights.

You made me open in many flowers; rocked me in the cradles of
many forms; hid me in death and found me again in life.

I came and your heart heaved; pain came to you and joy.

You touched me and tingled into love.

But in my eyes there is a film of shame and in my breast a
flicker of fear; my face is veiled and I weep when I cannot see
you.

Yet I know the endless thirst in your heart for sight of me, the
thirst that cries at my door in the repeated knockings of
sunrise.



LXXXI

You, in your timeless watch, listen to my approaching steps while
your gladness gathers in the morning twilight and breaks in the
burst of light.

The nearer I draw to you the deeper grows the fervour in the
dance of the sea.

Your world is a branching spray of light filling your hands, but
your heaven is in my secret heart; it slowly opens its buds in
shy love.



LXXXII

I will utter your name, sitting alone among the shadows of my
silent thoughts.

I will utter it without words, I will utter it without purpose.

For I am like a child that calls its mother an hundred times,
glad that it can say "Mother."



LXXXIII

I

I feel that all the stars shine in me.  The world breaks into my
life like a flood.

The flowers blossom in my body.  All the youthfulness of land and
water smokes like an incense in my heart; and the breath of all
things plays on my thoughts as on a flute.


II

When the world sleeps I come to your door.

The stars are silent, and I am afraid to sing.

I wait and watch, till your shadow passes by the balcony of night
and I return with a full heart.

Then in the morning I sing by the roadside;

The flowers in the hedge give me answer and the morning air
listens,

The travellers suddenly stop and look in my face, thinking I have
called them by their names.


III

Keep me at your door ever attending to your wishes, and let me go
about in your Kingdom accepting your call.

Let me not sink and disappear in the depth of languor.

Let not my life be worn out to tatters by penury of waste.

Let not those doubts encompass me,--the dust of distractions.

Let me not pursue many paths to gather many things.

Let me not bend my heart to the yoke of the many.

Let me hold my head high in the courage and pride of being your
servant.



LXXXIV

THE OARSMEN

  Do you hear the tumult of death afar,
  The call midst the fire-floods and poisonous clouds
  --The Captain's call to the steersman to turn the ship to an
      unnamed shore,
  For that time is over--the stagnant time in the port--
  Where the same old merchandise is bought and sold in an endless
      round,
  Where dead things drift in the exhaustion and emptiness of truth.

  They wake up in sudden fear and ask,
  "Comrades, what hour has struck?
  When shall the dawn begin?"
  The clouds have blotted away the stars--
  Who is there then can see the beckoning finger of the day?
  They run out with oars in hand, the beds are emptied, the mother
      prays, the wife watches by the door;
  There is a wail of parting that rises to the sky,
  And there is the Captain's voice in the dark:
  "Come, sailors, for the time in the harbour is over!"

  All the black evils in the world have overflowed their banks,
  Yet, oarsmen, take your places with the blessing of sorrow in
      your souls!
  Whom do you blame, brothers? Bow your heads down!
  The sin has been yours and ours.
  The heat growing in the heart of God for ages--
  The cowardice of the weak, the arrogance of the strong, the greed
      of fat prosperity, the rancour of the wronged, pride of race, and
      insult to man--
  Has burst God's peace, raging in storm.

  Like a ripe pod, let the tempest break its heart into pieces,
      scattering thunders.
  Stop your bluster of dispraise and of self-praise,
  And with the calm of silent prayer on your foreheads sail to that
      unnamed shore.

  We have known sins and evils every day and death we have known;
  They pass over our world like clouds mocking us with their
      transient lightning laughter.
  Suddenly they have stopped, become a prodigy,
  And men must stand before them saying:
  "We do not fear you, O Monster! for we have lived every day by
      conquering you,
  "And we die with the faith that Peace is true, and Good is true,
      and true is the eternal One!"

  If the Deathless dwell not in the heart of death,
  If glad wisdom bloom not bursting the sheath of sorrow,
  If sin do not die of its own revealment,
  If pride break not under its load of decorations,
  Then whence comes the hope that drives these men from their homes
      like stars rushing to their death in the morning light?
  Shall the value of the martyrs' blood and mothers' tears be
      utterly lost in the dust of the earth, not buying Heaven with
      their price?
  And when Man bursts his mortal bounds, is not the Boundless
      revealed that moment?



LXXXV

THE SONG OF THE DEFEATED

My Master has bid me while I stand at the roadside, to sing the
song of Defeat, for that is the bride whom He woos in secret.

She has put on the dark veil, hiding her face from the crowd, but
the jewel glows on her breast in the dark.

She is forsaken of the day, and God's night is waiting for her
with its lamps lighted and flowers wet with dew.

She is silent with her eyes downcast; she has left her home
behind her, from her home has come that wailing in the wind.

But the stars are singing the love-song of the eternal to a face
sweet with shame and suffering.

The door has been opened in the lonely chamber, the call has
sounded, and the heart of the darkness throbs with awe because of
the coming tryst.



LXXXVI

THANKSGIVING

Those who walk on the path of pride crushing the lowly life under
their tread, covering the tender green of the earth with their
footprints in blood;

Let them rejoice, and thank thee, Lord, for the day is theirs.

But I am thankful that my lot lies with the humble who suffer and
bear the burden of power, and hide their faces and stifle their
sobs in the dark.

For every throb of their pain has pulsed in the secret depth of
thy night, and every insult has been gathered into thy great
silence.  And the morrow is theirs.

O Sun, rise upon the bleeding hearts blossoming in flowers of the
morning, and the torchlight revelry of pride shrunken to ashes.




THE END












*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRUIT-GATHERING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gitanjali
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Gitanjali

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Author of introduction, etc.: W. B. Yeats

Release date: December 1, 2004 [eBook #7164]
                Most recently updated: December 10, 2023

Language: English

Credits: John B. Hare, Chetan Jain, Viswas G and Anand Rao


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GITANJALI ***




Gitanjali

Song Offerings

by Rabindranath Tagore

A collection of prose translations made by the author from the original
Bengali

With an introduction by
W. B. YEATS




TO
WILLIAM ROTHENSTEIN




INTRODUCTION


A few days ago I said to a distinguished Bengali doctor of medicine, “I
know no German, yet if a translation of a German poet had moved me, I
would go to the British Museum and find books in English that would
tell me something of his life, and of the history of his thought. But
though these prose translations from Rabindranath Tagore have stirred
my blood as nothing has for years, I shall not know anything of his
life, and of the movements of thought that have made them possible, if
some Indian traveller will not tell me.” It seemed to him natural that
I should be moved, for he said, “I read Rabindranath every day, to read
one line of his is to forget all the troubles of the world.” I said,
“An Englishman living in London in the reign of Richard the Second had
he been shown translations from Petrarch or from Dante, would have
found no books to answer his questions, but would have questioned some
Florentine banker or Lombard merchant as I question you. For all I
know, so abundant and simple is this poetry, the new renaissance has
been born in your country and I shall never know of it except by
hearsay.” He answered, “We have other poets, but none that are his
equal; we call this the epoch of Rabindranath. No poet seems to me as
famous in Europe as he is among us. He is as great in music as in
poetry, and his songs are sung from the west of India into Burma
wherever Bengali is spoken. He was already famous at nineteen when he
wrote his first novel; and plays when he was but little older, are
still played in Calcutta. I so much admire the completeness of his
life; when he was very young he wrote much of natural objects, he would
sit all day in his garden; from his twenty-fifth year or so to his
thirty-fifth perhaps, when he had a great sorrow, he wrote the most
beautiful love poetry in our language,” and then he said with deep
emotion, “words can never express what I owed at seventeen to his love
poetry. After that his art grew deeper, it became religious and
philosophical; all the inspiration of mankind are in his hymns. He is
the first among our saints who has not refused to live, but has spoken
out of Life itself, and that is why we give him our love.” I may have
changed his well-chosen words in my memory but not his thought. “A
little while ago he was to read divine service in one of our
churches—we of the Brahma Samaj use your word ‘church’ in English—it
was the largest in Calcutta and not only was it crowded, but the
streets were all but impassable because of the people.”

Other Indians came to see me and their reverence for this man sounded
strange in our world, where we hide great and little things under the
same veil of obvious comedy and half-serious depreciation. When we were
making the cathedrals had we a like reverence for our great men? “Every
morning at three—I know, for I have seen it”—one said to me, “he sits
immovable in contemplation, and for two hours does not awake from his
reverie upon the nature of God. His father, the Maha Rishi, would
sometimes sit there all through the next day; once, upon a river, he
fell into contemplation because of the beauty of the landscape, and the
rowers waited for eight hours before they could continue their
journey.” He then told me of Mr. Tagore’s family and how for
generations great men have come out of its cradles. “Today,” he said,
“there are Gogonendranath and Abanindranath Tagore, who are artists;
and Dwijendranath, Rabindranath’s brother, who is a great philosopher.
The squirrels come from the boughs and climb on to his knees and the
birds alight upon his hands.” I notice in these men’s thought a sense
of visible beauty and meaning as though they held that doctrine of
Nietzsche that we must not believe in the moral or intellectual beauty
which does not sooner or later impress itself upon physical things. I
said, “In the East you know how to keep a family illustrious. The other
day the curator of a museum pointed out to me a little dark-skinned man
who was arranging their Chinese prints and said, “That is the
hereditary connoisseur of the Mikado, he is the fourteenth of his
family to hold the post.’” He answered, “When Rabindranath was a boy he
had all round him in his home literature and music.” I thought of the
abundance, of the simplicity of the poems, and said, “In your country
is there much propagandist writing, much criticism? We have to do so
much, especially in my own country, that our minds gradually cease to
be creative, and yet we cannot help it. If our life was not a continual
warfare, we would not have taste, we would not know what is good, we
would not find hearers and readers. Four-fifths of our energy is spent
in the quarrel with bad taste, whether in our own minds or in the minds
of others.” “I understand,” he replied, “we too have our propagandist
writing. In the villages they recite long mythological poems adapted
from the Sanskrit in the Middle Ages, and they often insert passages
telling the people that they must do their duties.”


II

I have carried the manuscript of these translations about with me for
days, reading it in railway trains, or on the top of omnibuses and in
restaurants, and I have often had to close it lest some stranger would
see how much it moved me. These lyrics— which are in the original, my
Indians tell me, full of subtlety of rhythm, of untranslatable
delicacies of colour, of metrical invention—display in their thought a
world I have dreamed of all my live long. The work of a supreme
culture, they yet appear as much the growth of the common soil as the
grass and the rushes. A tradition, where poetry and religion are the
same thing, has passed through the centuries, gathering from learned
and unlearned metaphor and emotion, and carried back again to the
multitude the thought of the scholar and of the noble. If the
civilization of Bengal remains unbroken, if that common mind which—as
one divines—runs through all, is not, as with us, broken into a dozen
minds that know nothing of each other, something even of what is most
subtle in these verses will have come, in a few generations, to the
beggar on the roads. When there was but one mind in England, Chaucer
wrote his _Troilus and Cressida_, and thought he had written to be
read, or to be read out—for our time was coming on apace—he was sung by
minstrels for a while. Rabindranath Tagore, like Chaucer’s forerunners,
writes music for his words, and one understands at every moment that he
is so abundant, so spontaneous, so daring in his passion, so full of
surprise, because he is doing something which has never seemed strange,
unnatural, or in need of defence. These verses will not lie in little
well-printed books upon ladies’ tables, who turn the pages with
indolent hands that they may sigh over a life without meaning, which is
yet all they can know of life, or be carried by students at the
university to be laid aside when the work of life begins, but, as the
generations pass, travellers will hum them on the highway and men
rowing upon the rivers. Lovers, while they await one another, shall
find, in murmuring them, this love of God a magic gulf wherein their
own more bitter passion may bathe and renew its youth. At every moment
the heart of this poet flows outward to these without derogation or
condescension, for it has known that they will understand; and it has
filled itself with the circumstance of their lives. The traveller in
the read-brown clothes that he wears that dust may not show upon him,
the girl searching in her bed for the petals fallen from the wreath of
her royal lover, the servant or the bride awaiting the master’s
home-coming in the empty house, are images of the heart turning to God.
Flowers and rivers, the blowing of conch shells, the heavy rain of the
Indian July, or the moods of that heart in union or in separation; and
a man sitting in a boat upon a river playing lute, like one of those
figures full of mysterious meaning in a Chinese picture, is God
Himself. A whole people, a whole civilization, immeasurably strange to
us, seems to have been taken up into this imagination; and yet we are
not moved because of its strangeness, but because we have met our own
image, as though we had walked in Rossetti’s willow wood, or heard,
perhaps for the first time in literature, our voice as in a dream.

Since the Renaissance the writing of European saints—however familiar
their metaphor and the general structure of their thought—has ceased to
hold our attention. We know that we must at last forsake the world, and
we are accustomed in moments of weariness or exaltation to consider a
voluntary forsaking; but how can we, who have read so much poetry, seen
so many paintings, listened to so much music, where the cry of the
flesh and the cry of the soul seems one, forsake it harshly and rudely?
What have we in common with St. Bernard covering his eyes that they may
not dwell upon the beauty of the lakes of Switzerland, or with the
violent rhetoric of the Book of Revelations? We would, if we might,
find, as in this book, words full of courtesy. “I have got my leave.
Bid me farewell, my brothers! I bow to you all and take my departure.
Here I give back the keys of my door—and I give up all claims to my
house. I only ask for last kind words from you. We were neighbours for
long, but I received more than I could give. Now the day has dawned and
the lamp that lit my dark corner is out. A summons has come and I am
ready for my journey.” And it is our own mood, when it is furthest from
A Kempis or John of the Cross, that cries, “And because I love this
life, I know I shall love death as well.” Yet it is not only in our
thoughts of the parting that this book fathoms all. We had not known
that we loved God, hardly it may be that we believed in Him; yet
looking backward upon our life we discover, in our exploration of the
pathways of woods, in our delight in the lonely places of hills, in
that mysterious claim that we have made, unavailingly on the woman that
we have loved, the emotion that created this insidious sweetness.
“Entering my heart unbidden even as one of the common crowd, unknown to
me, my king, thou didst press the signet of eternity upon many a
fleeting moment.” This is no longer the sanctity of the cell and of the
scourge; being but a lifting up, as it were, into a greater intensity
of the mood of the painter, painting the dust and the sunlight, and we
go for a like voice to St. Francis and to William Blake who have seemed
so alien in our violent history.


III

We write long books where no page perhaps has any quality to make
writing a pleasure, being confident in some general design, just as we
fight and make money and fill our heads with politics—all dull things
in the doing—while Mr. Tagore, like the Indian civilization itself, has
been content to discover the soul and surrender himself to its
spontaneity. He often seems to contrast life with that of those who
have loved more after our fashion, and have more seeming weight in the
world, and always humbly as though he were only sure his way is best
for him: “Men going home glance at me and smile and fill me with shame.
I sit like a beggar maid, drawing my skirt over my face, and when they
ask me, what it is I want, I drop my eyes and answer them not.” At
another time, remembering how his life had once a different shape, he
will say, “Many an hour I have spent in the strife of the good and the
evil, but now it is the pleasure of my playmate of the empty days to
draw my heart on to him; and I know not why this sudden call to what
useless inconsequence.” An innocence, a simplicity that one does not
find elsewhere in literature makes the birds and the leaves seem as
near to him as they are near to children, and the changes of the
seasons great events as before our thoughts had arisen between them and
us. At times I wonder if he has it from the literature of Bengal or
from religion, and at other times, remembering the birds alighting on
his brother’s hands, I find pleasure in thinking it hereditary, a
mystery that was growing through the centuries like the courtesy of a
Tristan or a Pelanore. Indeed, when he is speaking of children, so much
a part of himself this quality seems, one is not certain that he is not
also speaking of the saints, “They build their houses with sand and
they play with empty shells. With withered leaves they weave their
boats and smilingly float them on the vast deep. Children have their
play on the seashore of worlds. They know not how to swim, they know
not how to cast nets. Pearl fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in
their ships, while children gather pebbles and scatter them again. They
seek not for hidden treasures, they know not how to cast nets.”

W.B. YEATS


_September_ 1912.




GITANJALI




1.


Thou hast made me endless, such is thy pleasure. This frail vessel thou
emptiest again and again, and fillest it ever with fresh life.

This little flute of a reed thou hast carried over hills and dales, and
hast breathed through it melodies eternally new.

At the immortal touch of thy hands my little heart loses its limits in
joy and gives birth to utterance ineffable.

Thy infinite gifts come to me only on these very small hands of mine.
Ages pass, and still thou pourest, and still there is room to fill.




2.


When thou commandest me to sing it seems that my heart would break with
pride; and I look to thy face, and tears come to my eyes.

All that is harsh and dissonant in my life melts into one sweet
harmony—and my adoration spreads wings like a glad bird on its flight
across the sea.

I know thou takest pleasure in my singing. I know that only as a singer
I come before thy presence.

I touch by the edge of the far-spreading wing of my song thy feet which
I could never aspire to reach.

Drunk with the joy of singing I forget myself and call thee friend who
art my lord.




3.


I know not how thou singest, my master! I ever listen in silent
amazement.

The light of thy music illumines the world. The life breath of thy
music runs from sky to sky. The holy stream of thy music breaks through
all stony obstacles and rushes on.

My heart longs to join in thy song, but vainly struggles for a voice. I
would speak, but speech breaks not into song, and I cry out baffled.
Ah, thou hast made my heart captive in the endless meshes of thy music,
my master!




4.


Life of my life, I shall ever try to keep my body pure, knowing that
thy living touch is upon all my limbs.

I shall ever try to keep all untruths out from my thoughts, knowing
that thou art that truth which has kindled the light of reason in my
mind.

I shall ever try to drive all evils away from my heart and keep my love
in flower, knowing that thou hast thy seat in the inmost shrine of my
heart.

And it shall be my endeavour to reveal thee in my actions, knowing it
is thy power gives me strength to act.




5.


I ask for a moment’s indulgence to sit by thy side. The works that I
have in hand I will finish afterwards.

Away from the sight of thy face my heart knows no rest nor respite, and
my work becomes an endless toil in a shoreless sea of toil.

Today the summer has come at my window with its sighs and murmurs; and
the bees are plying their minstrelsy at the court of the flowering
grove.

Now it is time to sit quite, face to face with thee, and to sing
dedication of life in this silent and overflowing leisure.




6.


Pluck this little flower and take it, delay not! I fear lest it droop
and drop into the dust.

I may not find a place in thy garland, but honour it with a touch of
pain from thy hand and pluck it. I fear lest the day end before I am
aware, and the time of offering go by.

Though its colour be not deep and its smell be faint, use this flower
in thy service and pluck it while there is time.




7.


My song has put off her adornments. She has no pride of dress and
decoration. Ornaments would mar our union; they would come between thee
and me; their jingling would drown thy whispers.

My poet’s vanity dies in shame before thy sight. O master poet, I have
sat down at thy feet. Only let me make my life simple and straight,
like a flute of reed for thee to fill with music.




8.


The child who is decked with prince’s robes and who has jewelled chains
round his neck loses all pleasure in his play; his dress hampers him at
every step.

In fear that it may be frayed, or stained with dust he keeps himself
from the world, and is afraid even to move.

Mother, it is no gain, thy bondage of finery, if it keep one shut off
from the healthful dust of the earth, if it rob one of the right of
entrance to the great fair of common human life.




9.


O Fool, try to carry thyself upon thy own shoulders! O beggar, to come
beg at thy own door!

Leave all thy burdens on his hands who can bear all, and never look
behind in regret.

Thy desire at once puts out the light from the lamp it touches with its
breath. It is unholy—take not thy gifts through its unclean hands.
Accept only what is offered by sacred love.




10.


Here is thy footstool and there rest thy feet where live the poorest,
and lowliest, and lost.

When I try to bow to thee, my obeisance cannot reach down to the depth
where thy feet rest among the poorest, and lowliest, and lost.

Pride can never approach to where thou walkest in the clothes of the
humble among the poorest, and lowliest, and lost.

My heart can never find its way to where thou keepest company with the
companionless among the poorest, the lowliest, and the lost.




11.


Leave this chanting and singing and telling of beads! Whom dost thou
worship in this lonely dark corner of a temple with doors all shut?
Open thine eyes and see thy God is not before thee!

He is there where the tiller is tilling the hard ground and where the
pathmaker is breaking stones. He is with them in sun and in shower, and
his garment is covered with dust. Put of thy holy mantle and even like
him come down on the dusty soil!

Deliverance? Where is this deliverance to be found? Our master himself
has joyfully taken upon him the bonds of creation; he is bound with us
all for ever.

Come out of thy meditations and leave aside thy flowers and incense!
What harm is there if thy clothes become tattered and stained? Meet him
and stand by him in toil and in sweat of thy brow.




12.


The time that my journey takes is long and the way of it long.

I came out on the chariot of the first gleam of light, and pursued my
voyage through the wildernesses of worlds leaving my track on many a
star and planet.

It is the most distant course that comes nearest to thyself, and that
training is the most intricate which leads to the utter simplicity of a
tune.

The traveller has to knock at every alien door to come to his own, and
one has to wander through all the outer worlds to reach the innermost
shrine at the end.

My eyes strayed far and wide before I shut them and said “Here art
thou!”

The question and the cry “Oh, where?” melt into tears of a thousand
streams and deluge the world with the flood of the assurance “I am!”




13.


The song that I came to sing remains unsung to this day.

I have spent my days in stringing and in unstringing my instrument.

The time has not come true, the words have not been rightly set; only
there is the agony of wishing in my heart.

The blossom has not opened; only the wind is sighing by.

I have not seen his face, nor have I listened to his voice; only I have
heard his gentle footsteps from the road before my house.

The livelong day has passed in spreading his seat on the floor; but the
lamp has not been lit and I cannot ask him into my house.

I live in the hope of meeting with him; but this meeting is not yet.




14.


My desires are many and my cry is pitiful, but ever didst thou save me
by hard refusals; and this strong mercy has been wrought into my life
through and through.

Day by day thou art making me worthy of the simple, great gifts that
thou gavest to me unasked—this sky and the light, this body and the
life and the mind—saving me from perils of overmuch desire.

There are times when I languidly linger and times when I awaken and
hurry in search of my goal; but cruelly thou hidest thyself from before
me.

Day by day thou art making me worthy of thy full acceptance by refusing
me ever and anon, saving me from perils of weak, uncertain desire.




15.


I am here to sing thee songs. In this hall of thine I have a corner
seat.

In thy world I have no work to do; my useless life can only break out
in tunes without a purpose.

When the hour strikes for thy silent worship at the dark temple of
midnight, command me, my master, to stand before thee to sing.

When in the morning air the golden harp is tuned, honour me, commanding
my presence.




16.


I have had my invitation to this world’s festival, and thus my life has
been blessed. My eyes have seen and my ears have heard.

It was my part at this feast to play upon my instrument, and I have
done all I could.

Now, I ask, has the time come at last when I may go in and see thy face
and offer thee my silent salutation?




17.


I am only waiting for love to give myself up at last into his hands.
That is why it is so late and why I have been guilty of such omissions.

They come with their laws and their codes to bind me fast; but I evade
them ever, for I am only waiting for love to give myself up at last
into his hands.

People blame me and call me heedless; I doubt not they are right in
their blame.

The market day is over and work is all done for the busy. Those who
came to call me in vain have gone back in anger. I am only waiting for
love to give myself up at last into his hands.




18.


Clouds heap upon clouds and it darkens. Ah, love, why dost thou let me
wait outside at the door all alone?

In the busy moments of the noontide work I am with the crowd, but on
this dark lonely day it is only for thee that I hope.

If thou showest me not thy face, if thou leavest me wholly aside, I
know not how I am to pass these long, rainy hours.

I keep gazing on the far-away gloom of the sky, and my heart wanders
wailing with the restless wind.




19.


If thou speakest not I will fill my heart with thy silence and endure
it. I will keep still and wait like the night with starry vigil and its
head bent low with patience.

The morning will surely come, the darkness will vanish, and thy voice
pour down in golden streams breaking through the sky.

Then thy words will take wing in songs from every one of my birds’
nests, and thy melodies will break forth in flowers in all my forest
groves.




20.


On the day when the lotus bloomed, alas, my mind was straying, and I
knew it not. My basket was empty and the flower remained unheeded.

Only now and again a sadness fell upon me, and I started up from my
dream and felt a sweet trace of a strange fragrance in the south wind.

That vague sweetness made my heart ache with longing and it seemed to
me that is was the eager breath of the summer seeking for its
completion.

I knew not then that it was so near, that it was mine, and that this
perfect sweetness had blossomed in the depth of my own heart.




21.


I must launch out my boat. The languid hours pass by on the shore—Alas
for me!

The spring has done its flowering and taken leave. And now with the
burden of faded futile flowers I wait and linger.

The waves have become clamorous, and upon the bank in the shady lane
the yellow leaves flutter and fall.

What emptiness do you gaze upon! Do you not feel a thrill passing
through the air with the notes of the far-away song floating from the
other shore?




22.


In the deep shadows of the rainy July, with secret steps, thou walkest,
silent as night, eluding all watchers.

Today the morning has closed its eyes, heedless of the insistent calls
of the loud east wind, and a thick veil has been drawn over the
ever-wakeful blue sky.

The woodlands have hushed their songs, and doors are all shut at every
house. Thou art the solitary wayfarer in this deserted street. Oh my
only friend, my best beloved, the gates are open in my house—do not
pass by like a dream.




23.


Art thou abroad on this stormy night on thy journey of love, my friend?
The sky groans like one in despair.

I have no sleep tonight. Ever and again I open my door and look out on
the darkness, my friend!

I can see nothing before me. I wonder where lies thy path!

By what dim shore of the ink-black river, by what far edge of the
frowning forest, through what mazy depth of gloom art thou threading
thy course to come to me, my friend?




24.


If the day is done, if birds sing no more, if the wind has flagged
tired, then draw the veil of darkness thick upon me, even as thou hast
wrapt the earth with the coverlet of sleep and tenderly closed the
petals of the drooping lotus at dusk.

From the traveller, whose sack of provisions is empty before the voyage
is ended, whose garment is torn and dustladen, whose strength is
exhausted, remove shame and poverty, and renew his life like a flower
under the cover of thy kindly night.




25.


In the night of weariness let me give myself up to sleep without
struggle, resting my trust upon thee.

Let me not force my flagging spirit into a poor preparation for thy
worship.

It is thou who drawest the veil of night upon the tired eyes of the day
to renew its sight in a fresher gladness of awakening.




26.


He came and sat by my side but I woke not. What a cursed sleep it was,
O miserable me!

He came when the night was still; he had his harp in his hands, and my
dreams became resonant with its melodies.

Alas, why are my nights all thus lost? Ah, why do I ever miss his sight
whose breath touches my sleep?




27.


Light, oh where is the light? Kindle it with the burning fire of
desire!

There is the lamp but never a flicker of a flame—is such thy fate, my
heart? Ah, death were better by far for thee!

Misery knocks at thy door, and her message is that thy lord is wakeful,
and he calls thee to the love-tryst through the darkness of night.

The sky is overcast with clouds and the rain is ceaseless. I know not
what this is that stirs in me—I know not its meaning.

A moment’s flash of lightning drags down a deeper gloom on my sight,
and my heart gropes for the path to where the music of the night calls
me.

Light, oh where is the light! Kindle it with the burning fire of
desire! It thunders and the wind rushes screaming through the void. The
night is black as a black stone. Let not the hours pass by in the dark.
Kindle the lamp of love with thy life.




28.


Obstinate are the trammels, but my heart aches when I try to break
them.

Freedom is all I want, but to hope for it I feel ashamed.

I am certain that priceless wealth is in thee, and that thou art my
best friend, but I have not the heart to sweep away the tinsel that
fills my room.

The shroud that covers me is a shroud of dust and death; I hate it, yet
hug it in love.

My debts are large, my failures great, my shame secret and heavy; yet
when I come to ask for my good, I quake in fear lest my prayer be
granted.




29.


He whom I enclose with my name is weeping in this dungeon. I am ever
busy building this wall all around; and as this wall goes up into the
sky day by day I lose sight of my true being in its dark shadow.

I take pride in this great wall, and I plaster it with dust and sand
lest a least hole should be left in this name; and for all the care I
take I lose sight of my true being.




30.


I came out alone on my way to my tryst. But who is this that follows me
in the silent dark?

I move aside to avoid his presence but I escape him not.

He makes the dust rise from the earth with his swagger; he adds his
loud voice to every word that I utter.

He is my own little self, my lord, he knows no shame; but I am ashamed
to come to thy door in his company.




31.


“Prisoner, tell me, who was it that bound you?”

“It was my master,” said the prisoner. “I thought I could outdo
everybody in the world in wealth and power, and I amassed in my own
treasure-house the money due to my king. When sleep overcame me I lay
upon the bed that was for my lord, and on waking up I found I was a
prisoner in my own treasure-house.”

“Prisoner, tell me, who was it that wrought this unbreakable chain?”

“It was I,” said the prisoner, “who forged this chain very carefully. I
thought my invincible power would hold the world captive leaving me in
a freedom undisturbed. Thus night and day I worked at the chain with
huge fires and cruel hard strokes. When at last the work was done and
the links were complete and unbreakable, I found that it held me in its
grip.”




32.


By all means they try to hold me secure who love me in this world. But
it is otherwise with thy love which is greater than theirs, and thou
keepest me free.

Lest I forget them they never venture to leave me alone. But day passes
by after day and thou art not seen.

If I call not thee in my prayers, if I keep not thee in my heart, thy
love for me still waits for my love.




33.


When it was day they came into my house and said, “We shall only take
the smallest room here.”

They said, “We shall help you in the worship of your God and humbly
accept only our own share in his grace”; and then they took their seat
in a corner and they sat quiet and meek.

But in the darkness of night I find they break into my sacred shrine,
strong and turbulent, and snatch with unholy greed the offerings from
God’s altar.




34.


Let only that little be left of me whereby I may name thee my all.

Let only that little be left of my will whereby I may feel thee on
every side, and come to thee in everything, and offer to thee my love
every moment.

Let only that little be left of me whereby I may never hide thee.

Let only that little of my fetters be left whereby I am bound with thy
will, and thy purpose is carried out in my life—and that is the fetter
of thy love.




35.


Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high;

Where knowledge is free;

Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow
domestic walls;

Where words come out from the depth of truth;

Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection;

Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the dreary
desert sand of dead habit;

Where the mind is led forward by thee into ever-widening thought and
action—

Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake.




36.


This is my prayer to thee, my lord—strike, strike at the root of penury
in my heart.

Give me the strength lightly to bear my joys and sorrows.

Give me the strength to make my love fruitful in service.

Give me the strength never to disown the poor or bend my knees before
insolent might.

Give me the strength to raise my mind high above daily trifles.

And give me the strength to surrender my strength to thy will with
love.




37.


I thought that my voyage had come to its end at the last limit of my
power,—that the path before me was closed, that provisions were
exhausted and the time come to take shelter in a silent obscurity.

But I find that thy will knows no end in me. And when old words die out
on the tongue, new melodies break forth from the heart; and where the
old tracks are lost, new country is revealed with its wonders.




38.


That I want thee, only thee—let my heart repeat without end. All
desires that distract me, day and night, are false and empty to the
core.

As the night keeps hidden in its gloom the petition for light, even
thus in the depth of my unconsciousness rings the cry—I want thee, only
thee.

As the storm still seeks its end in peace when it strikes against peace
with all its might, even thus my rebellion strikes against thy love and
still its cry is—I want thee, only thee.




39.


When the heart is hard and parched up, come upon me with a shower of
mercy.

When grace is lost from life, come with a burst of song.

When tumultuous work raises its din on all sides shutting me out from
beyond, come to me, my lord of silence, with thy peace and rest.

When my beggarly heart sits crouched, shut up in a corner, break open
the door, my king, and come with the ceremony of a king.

When desire blinds the mind with delusion and dust, O thou holy one,
thou wakeful, come with thy light and thy thunder.




40.


The rain has held back for days and days, my God, in my arid heart. The
horizon is fiercely naked—not the thinnest cover of a soft cloud, not
the vaguest hint of a distant cool shower.

Send thy angry storm, dark with death, if it is thy wish, and with
lashes of lightning startle the sky from end to end.

But call back, my lord, call back this pervading silent heat, still and
keen and cruel, burning the heart with dire despair.

Let the cloud of grace bend low from above like the tearful look of the
mother on the day of the father’s wrath.




41.


Where dost thou stand behind them all, my lover, hiding thyself in the
shadows? They push thee and pass thee by on the dusty road, taking thee
for naught. I wait here weary hours spreading my offerings for thee,
while passers-by come and take my flowers, one by one, and my basket is
nearly empty.

The morning time is past, and the noon. In the shade of evening my eyes
are drowsy with sleep. Men going home glance at me and smile and fill
me with shame. I sit like a beggar maid, drawing my skirt over my face,
and when they ask me, what it is I want, I drop my eyes and answer them
not.

Oh, how, indeed, could I tell them that for thee I wait, and that thou
hast promised to come. How could I utter for shame that I keep for my
dowry this poverty. Ah, I hug this pride in the secret of my heart.

I sit on the grass and gaze upon the sky and dream of the sudden
splendour of thy coming—all the lights ablaze, golden pennons flying
over thy car, and they at the roadside standing agape, when they see
thee come down from thy seat to raise me from the dust, and set at thy
side this ragged beggar girl a-tremble with shame and pride, like a
creeper in a summer breeze.

But time glides on and still no sound of the wheels of thy chariot.
Many a procession passes by with noise and shouts and glamour of glory.
Is it only thou who wouldst stand in the shadow silent and behind them
all? And only I who would wait and weep and wear out my heart in vain
longing?




42.


Early in the day it was whispered that we should sail in a boat, only
thou and I, and never a soul in the world would know of this our
pilgrimage to no country and to no end.

In that shoreless ocean, at thy silently listening smile my songs would
swell in melodies, free as waves, free from all bondage of words.

Is the time not come yet? Are there works still to do? Lo, the evening
has come down upon the shore and in the fading light the seabirds come
flying to their nests.

Who knows when the chains will be off, and the boat, like the last
glimmer of sunset, vanish into the night?




43.


The day was when I did not keep myself in readiness for thee; and
entering my heart unbidden even as one of the common crowd, unknown to
me, my king, thou didst press the signet of eternity upon many a
fleeting moment of my life.

And today when by chance I light upon them and see thy signature, I
find they have lain scattered in the dust mixed with the memory of joys
and sorrows of my trivial days forgotten.

Thou didst not turn in contempt from my childish play among dust, and
the steps that I heard in my playroom are the same that are echoing
from star to star.




44.


This is my delight, thus to wait and watch at the wayside where shadow
chases light and the rain comes in the wake of the summer.

Messengers, with tidings from unknown skies, greet me and speed along
the road. My heart is glad within, and the breath of the passing breeze
is sweet.

From dawn till dusk I sit here before my door, and I know that of a
sudden the happy moment will arrive when I shall see.

In the meanwhile I smile and I sing all alone. In the meanwhile the air
is filling with the perfume of promise.




45.


Have you not heard his silent steps? He comes, comes, ever comes.

Every moment and every age, every day and every night he comes, comes,
ever comes.

Many a song have I sung in many a mood of mind, but all their notes
have always proclaimed, “He comes, comes, ever comes.”

In the fragrant days of sunny April through the forest path he comes,
comes, ever comes.

In the rainy gloom of July nights on the thundering chariot of clouds
he comes, comes, ever comes.

In sorrow after sorrow it is his steps that press upon my heart, and it
is the golden touch of his feet that makes my joy to shine.




46.


I know not from what distant time thou art ever coming nearer to meet
me. Thy sun and stars can never keep thee hidden from me for aye.

In many a morning and eve thy footsteps have been heard and thy
messenger has come within my heart and called me in secret.

I know not only why today my life is all astir, and a feeling of
tremulous joy is passing through my heart.

It is as if the time were come to wind up my work, and I feel in the
air a faint smell of thy sweet presence.




47.


The night is nearly spent waiting for him in vain. I fear lest in the
morning he suddenly come to my door when I have fallen asleep wearied
out. Oh friends, leave the way open to him— forbid him not.

If the sounds of his steps does not wake me, do not try to rouse me, I
pray. I wish not to be called from my sleep by the clamorous choir of
birds, by the riot of wind at the festival of morning light. Let me
sleep undisturbed even if my lord comes of a sudden to my door.

Ah, my sleep, precious sleep, which only waits for his touch to vanish.
Ah, my closed eyes that would open their lids only to the light of his
smile when he stands before me like a dream emerging from darkness of
sleep.

Let him appear before my sight as the first of all lights and all
forms. The first thrill of joy to my awakened soul let it come from his
glance. And let my return to myself be immediate return to him.




48.


The morning sea of silence broke into ripples of bird songs; and the
flowers were all merry by the roadside; and the wealth of gold was
scattered through the rift of the clouds while we busily went on our
way and paid no heed.

We sang no glad songs nor played; we went not to the village for
barter; we spoke not a word nor smiled; we lingered not on the way. We
quickened our pace more and more as the time sped by.

The sun rose to the mid sky and doves cooed in the shade. Withered
leaves danced and whirled in the hot air of noon. The shepherd boy
drowsed and dreamed in the shadow of the banyan tree, and I laid myself
down by the water and stretched my tired limbs on the grass.

My companions laughed at me in scorn; they held their heads high and
hurried on; they never looked back nor rested; they vanished in the
distant blue haze. They crossed many meadows and hills, and passed
through strange, far-away countries. All honour to you, heroic host of
the interminable path! Mockery and reproach pricked me to rise, but
found no response in me. I gave myself up for lost in the depth of a
glad humiliation—in the shadow of a dim delight.

The repose of the sun-embroidered green gloom slowly spread over my
heart. I forgot for what I had travelled, and I surrendered my mind
without struggle to the maze of shadows and songs.

At last, when I woke from my slumber and opened my eyes, I saw thee
standing by me, flooding my sleep with thy smile. How I had feared that
the path was long and wearisome, and the struggle to reach thee was
hard!




49.


You came down from your throne and stood at my cottage door.

I was singing all alone in a corner, and the melody caught your ear.
You came down and stood at my cottage door.

Masters are many in your hall, and songs are sung there at all hours.
But the simple carol of this novice struck at your love. One plaintive
little strain mingled with the great music of the world, and with a
flower for a prize you came down and stopped at my cottage door.




50.


I had gone a-begging from door to door in the village path, when thy
golden chariot appeared in the distance like a gorgeous dream and I
wondered who was this King of all kings!

My hopes rose high and methought my evil days were at an end, and I
stood waiting for alms to be given unasked and for wealth scattered on
all sides in the dust.

The chariot stopped where I stood. Thy glance fell on me and thou
camest down with a smile. I felt that the luck of my life had come at
last. Then of a sudden thou didst hold out thy right hand and say “What
hast thou to give to me?”

Ah, what a kingly jest was it to open thy palm to a beggar to beg! I
was confused and stood undecided, and then from my wallet I slowly took
out the least little grain of corn and gave it to thee.

But how great my surprise when at the day’s end I emptied my bag on the
floor to find a least little gram of gold among the poor heap. I
bitterly wept and wished that I had had the heart to give thee my all.




51.


The night darkened. Our day’s works had been done. We thought that the
last guest had arrived for the night and the doors in the village were
all shut. Only some said the king was to come. We laughed and said “No,
it cannot be!”

It seemed there were knocks at the door and we said it was nothing but
the wind. We put out the lamps and lay down to sleep. Only some said,
“It is the messenger!” We laughed and said “No, it must be the wind!”

There came a sound in the dead of the night. We sleepily thought it was
the distant thunder. The earth shook, the walls rocked, and it troubled
us in our sleep. Only some said it was the sound of wheels. We said in
a drowsy murmur, “No, it must be the rumbling of clouds!”

The night was still dark when the drum sounded. The voice came “Wake
up! delay not!” We pressed our hands on our hearts and shuddered with
fear. Some said, “Lo, there is the king’s flag!” We stood up on our
feet and cried “There is no time for delay!”

The king has come—but where are lights, where are wreaths? Where is the
throne to seat him? Oh, shame! Oh utter shame! Where is the hall, the
decorations? Someone has said, “Vain is this cry! Greet him with empty
hands, lead him into thy rooms all bare!”

Open the doors, let the conch-shells be sounded! in the depth of the
night has come the king of our dark, dreary house. The thunder roars in
the sky. The darkness shudders with lightning. Bring out thy tattered
piece of mat and spread it in the courtyard. With the storm has come of
a sudden our king of the fearful night.




52.


I thought I should ask of thee—but I dared not—the rose wreath thou
hadst on thy neck. Thus I waited for the morning, when thou didst
depart, to find a few fragments on the bed. And like a beggar I
searched in the dawn only for a stray petal or two.

Ah me, what is it I find? What token left of thy love? It is no flower,
no spices, no vase of perfumed water. It is thy mighty sword, flashing
as a flame, heavy as a bolt of thunder. The young light of morning
comes through the window and spreads itself upon thy bed. The morning
bird twitters and asks, “Woman, what hast thou got?” No, it is no
flower, nor spices, nor vase of perfumed water—it is thy dreadful
sword.

I sit and muse in wonder, what gift is this of thine. I can find no
place to hide it. I am ashamed to wear it, frail as I am, and it hurts
me when I press it to my bosom. Yet shall I bear in my heart this
honour of the burden of pain, this gift of thine.

From now there shall be no fear left for me in this world, and thou
shalt be victorious in all my strife. Thou hast left death for my
companion and I shall crown him with my life. Thy sword is with me to
cut asunder my bonds, and there shall be no fear left for me in the
world.

From now I leave off all petty decorations. Lord of my heart, no more
shall there be for me waiting and weeping in corners, no more coyness
and sweetness of demeanour. Thou hast given me thy sword for adornment.
No more doll’s decorations for me!




53.


Beautiful is thy wristlet, decked with stars and cunningly wrought in
myriad-coloured jewels. But more beautiful to me thy sword with its
curve of lightning like the outspread wings of the divine bird of
Vishnu, perfectly poised in the angry red light of the sunset.

It quivers like the one last response of life in ecstasy of pain at the
final stroke of death; it shines like the pure flame of being burning
up earthly sense with one fierce flash.

Beautiful is thy wristlet, decked with starry gems; but thy sword, O
lord of thunder, is wrought with uttermost beauty, terrible to behold
or think of.




54.


I asked nothing from thee; I uttered not my name to thine ear. When
thou took’st thy leave I stood silent. I was alone by the well where
the shadow of the tree fell aslant, and the women had gone home with
their brown earthen pitchers full to the brim. They called me and
shouted, “Come with us, the morning is wearing on to noon.” But I
languidly lingered awhile lost in the midst of vague musings.

I heard not thy steps as thou camest. Thine eyes were sad when they
fell on me; thy voice was tired as thou spokest low—“Ah, I am a thirsty
traveller.” I started up from my day-dreams and poured water from my
jar on thy joined palms. The leaves rustled overhead; the cuckoo sang
from the unseen dark, and perfume of _babla_ flowers came from the bend
of the road.

I stood speechless with shame when my name thou didst ask. Indeed, what
had I done for thee to keep me in remembrance? But the memory that I
could give water to thee to allay thy thirst will cling to my heart and
enfold it in sweetness. The morning hour is late, the bird sings in
weary notes, _neem_ leaves rustle overhead and I sit and think and
think.




55.


Languor is upon your heart and the slumber is still on your eyes.

Has not the word come to you that the flower is reigning in splendour
among thorns? Wake, oh awaken! let not the time pass in vain!

At the end of the stony path, in the country of virgin solitude, my
friend is sitting all alone. Deceive him not. Wake, oh awaken!

What if the sky pants and trembles with the heat of the midday sun—what
if the burning sand spreads its mantle of thirst—

Is there no joy in the deep of your heart? At every footfall of yours,
will not the harp of the road break out in sweet music of pain?




56.


Thus it is that thy joy in me is so full. Thus it is that thou hast
come down to me. O thou lord of all heavens, where would be thy love if
I were not?

Thou hast taken me as thy partner of all this wealth. In my heart is
the endless play of thy delight. In my life thy will is ever taking
shape.

And for this, thou who art the King of kings hast decked thyself in
beauty to captivate my heart. And for this thy love loses itself in the
love of thy lover, and there art thou seen in the perfect union of two.




57.


Light, my light, the world-filling light, the eye-kissing light,
heart-sweetening light!

Ah, the light dances, my darling, at the centre of my life; the light
strikes, my darling, the chords of my love; the sky opens, the wind
runs wild, laughter passes over the earth.

The butterflies spread their sails on the sea of light. Lilies and
jasmines surge up on the crest of the waves of light.

The light is shattered into gold on every cloud, my darling, and it
scatters gems in profusion.

Mirth spreads from leaf to leaf, my darling, and gladness without
measure. The heaven’s river has drowned its banks and the flood of joy
is abroad.




58.


Let all the strains of joy mingle in my last song—the joy that makes
the earth flow over in the riotous excess of the grass, the joy that
sets the twin brothers, life and death, dancing over the wide world,
the joy that sweeps in with the tempest, shaking and waking all life
with laughter, the joy that sits still with its tears on the open red
lotus of pain, and the joy that throws everything it has upon the dust,
and knows not a word.




59.


Yes, I know, this is nothing but thy love, O beloved of my heart— this
golden light that dances upon the leaves, these idle clouds sailing
across the sky, this passing breeze leaving its coolness upon my
forehead.

The morning light has flooded my eyes—this is thy message to my heart.
Thy face is bent from above, thy eyes look down on my eyes, and my
heart has touched thy feet.




60.


On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. The infinite sky is
motionless overhead and the restless water is boisterous. On the
seashore of endless worlds the children meet with shouts and dances.

They build their houses with sand and they play with empty shells. With
withered leaves they weave their boats and smilingly float them on the
vast deep. Children have their play on the seashore of worlds.

They know not how to swim, they know not how to cast nets. Pearl
fishers dive for pearls, merchants sail in their ships, while children
gather pebbles and scatter them again. They seek not for hidden
treasures, they know not how to cast nets.

The sea surges up with laughter and pale gleams the smile of the sea
beach. Death-dealing waves sing meaningless ballads to the children,
even like a mother while rocking her baby’s cradle. The sea plays with
children, and pale gleams the smile of the sea beach.

On the seashore of endless worlds children meet. Tempest roams in the
pathless sky, ships get wrecked in the trackless water, death is abroad
and children play. On the seashore of endless worlds is the great
meeting of children.




61.


The sleep that flits on baby’s eyes—does anybody know from where it
comes? Yes, there is a rumour that it has its dwelling there, in the
fairy village among shadows of the forest dimly lit with glow-worms,
there hang two timid buds of enchantment. From there it comes to kiss
baby’s eyes.

The smile that flickers on baby’s lips when he sleeps—does anybody know
where it was born? Yes, there is a rumour that a young pale beam of a
crescent moon touched the edge of a vanishing autumn cloud, and there
the smile was first born in the dream of a dew-washed morning—the smile
that flickers on baby’s lips when he sleeps.

The sweet, soft freshness that blooms on baby’s limbs—does anybody know
where it was hidden so long? Yes, when the mother was a young girl it
lay pervading her heart in tender and silent mystery of love—the sweet,
soft freshness that has bloomed on baby’s limbs.




62.


When I bring to you coloured toys, my child, I understand why there is
such a play of colours on clouds, on water, and why flowers are painted
in tints—when I give coloured toys to you, my child.

When I sing to make you dance I truly now why there is music in leaves,
and why waves send their chorus of voices to the heart of the listening
earth—when I sing to make you dance.

When I bring sweet things to your greedy hands I know why there is
honey in the cup of the flowers and why fruits are secretly filled with
sweet juice—when I bring sweet things to your greedy hands.

When I kiss your face to make you smile, my darling, I surely
understand what pleasure streams from the sky in morning light, and
what delight that is that is which the summer breeze brings to my
body—when I kiss you to make you smile.




63.


Thou hast made me known to friends whom I knew not. Thou hast given me
seats in homes not my own. Thou hast brought the distant near and made
a brother of the stranger.

I am uneasy at heart when I have to leave my accustomed shelter; I
forget that there abides the old in the new, and that there also thou
abidest.

Through birth and death, in this world or in others, wherever thou
leadest me it is thou, the same, the one companion of my endless life
who ever linkest my heart with bonds of joy to the unfamiliar.

When one knows thee, then alien there is none, then no door is shut.
Oh, grant me my prayer that I may never lose the bliss of the touch of
the one in the play of many.




64.


On the slope of the desolate river among tall grasses I asked her,
“Maiden, where do you go shading your lamp with your mantle? My house
is all dark and lonesome—lend me your light!” she raised her dark eyes
for a moment and looked at my face through the dusk. “I have come to
the river,” she said, “to float my lamp on the stream when the daylight
wanes in the west.” I stood alone among tall grasses and watched the
timid flame of her lamp uselessly drifting in the tide.

In the silence of gathering night I asked her, “Maiden, your lights are
all lit—then where do you go with your lamp? My house is all dark and
lonesome—lend me your light.” She raised her dark eyes on my face and
stood for a moment doubtful. “I have come,” she said at last, “to
dedicate my lamp to the sky.” I stood and watched her light uselessly
burning in the void.

In the moonless gloom of midnight I ask her, “Maiden, what is your
quest, holding the lamp near your heart? My house is all dark and
lonesome—lend me your light.” She stopped for a minute and thought and
gazed at my face in the dark. “I have brought my light,” she said, “to
join the carnival of lamps.” I stood and watched her little lamp
uselessly lost among lights.




65.


What divine drink wouldst thou have, my God, from this overflowing cup
of my life?

My poet, is it thy delight to see thy creation through my eyes and to
stand at the portals of my ears silently to listen to thine own eternal
harmony?

Thy world is weaving words in my mind and thy joy is adding music to
them. Thou givest thyself to me in love and then feelest thine own
entire sweetness in me.




66.


She who ever had remained in the depth of my being, in the twilight of
gleams and of glimpses; she who never opened her veils in the morning
light, will be my last gift to thee, my God, folded in my final song.

Words have wooed yet failed to win her; persuasion has stretched to her
its eager arms in vain.

I have roamed from country to country keeping her in the core of my
heart, and around her have risen and fallen the growth and decay of my
life.

Over my thoughts and actions, my slumbers and dreams, she reigned yet
dwelled alone and apart.

Many a man knocked at my door and asked for her and turned away in
despair.

There was none in the world who ever saw her face to face, and she
remained in her loneliness waiting for thy recognition.




67.


Thou art the sky and thou art the nest as well.

O thou beautiful, there in the nest is thy love that encloses the soul
with colours and sounds and odours.

There comes the morning with the golden basket in her right hand
bearing the wreath of beauty, silently to crown the earth.

And there comes the evening over the lonely meadows deserted by herds,
through trackless paths, carrying cool draughts of peace in her golden
pitcher from the western ocean of rest.

But there, where spreads the infinite sky for the soul to take her
flight in, reigns the stainless white radiance. There is no day nor
night, nor form nor colour, and never, never a word.




68.


Thy sunbeam comes upon this earth of mine with arms outstretched and
stands at my door the livelong day to carry back to thy feet clouds
made of my tears and sighs and songs.

With fond delight thou wrappest about thy starry breast that mantle of
misty cloud, turning it into numberless shapes and folds and colouring
it with hues everchanging.

It is so light and so fleeting, tender and tearful and dark, that is
why thou lovest it, O thou spotless and serene. And that is why it may
cover thy awful white light with its pathetic shadows.




69.


The same stream of life that runs through my veins night and day runs
through the world and dances in rhythmic measures.

It is the same life that shoots in joy through the dust of the earth in
numberless blades of grass and breaks into tumultuous waves of leaves
and flowers.

It is the same life that is rocked in the ocean-cradle of birth and of
death, in ebb and in flow.

I feel my limbs are made glorious by the touch of this world of life.
And my pride is from the life-throb of ages dancing in my blood this
moment.




70.


Is it beyond thee to be glad with the gladness of this rhythm? to be
tossed and lost and broken in the whirl of this fearful joy?

All things rush on, they stop not, they look not behind, no power can
hold them back, they rush on.

Keeping steps with that restless, rapid music, seasons come dancing and
pass away—colours, tunes, and perfumes pour in endless cascades in the
abounding joy that scatters and gives up and dies every moment.




71.


That I should make much of myself and turn it on all sides, thus
casting coloured shadows on thy radiance—such is thy _maya_.

Thou settest a barrier in thine own being and then callest thy severed
self in myriad notes. This thy self-separation has taken body in me.

The poignant song is echoed through all the sky in many-coloured tears
and smiles, alarms and hopes; waves rise up and sink again, dreams
break and form. In me is thy own defeat of self.

This screen that thou hast raised is painted with innumerable figures
with the brush of the night and the day. Behind it thy seat is woven in
wondrous mysteries of curves, casting away all barren lines of
straightness.

The great pageant of thee and me has overspread the sky. With the tune
of thee and me all the air is vibrant, and all ages pass with the
hiding and seeking of thee and me.




72.


He it is, the innermost one, who awakens my being with his deep hidden
touches.

He it is who puts his enchantment upon these eyes and joyfully plays on
the chords of my heart in varied cadence of pleasure and pain.

He it is who weaves the web of this _maya_ in evanescent hues of gold
and silver, blue and green, and lets peep out through the folds his
feet, at whose touch I forget myself.

Days come and ages pass, and it is ever he who moves my heart in many a
name, in many a guise, in many a rapture of joy and of sorrow.




73.


Deliverance is not for me in renunciation. I feel the embrace of
freedom in a thousand bonds of delight.

Thou ever pourest for me the fresh draught of thy wine of various
colours and fragrance, filling this earthen vessel to the brim.

My world will light its hundred different lamps with thy flame and
place them before the altar of thy temple.

No, I will never shut the doors of my senses. The delights of sight and
hearing and touch will bear thy delight.

Yes, all my illusions will burn into illumination of joy, and all my
desires ripen into fruits of love.




74.


The day is no more, the shadow is upon the earth. It is time that I go
to the stream to fill my pitcher.

The evening air is eager with the sad music of the water. Ah, it calls
me out into the dusk. In the lonely lane there is no passer-by, the
wind is up, the ripples are rampant in the river.

I know not if I shall come back home. I know not whom I shall chance to
meet. There at the fording in the little boat the unknown man plays
upon his lute.




75.


Thy gifts to us mortals fulfil all our needs and yet run back to thee
undiminished.

The river has its everyday work to do and hastens through fields and
hamlets; yet its incessant stream winds towards the washing of thy
feet.

The flower sweetens the air with its perfume; yet its last service is
to offer itself to thee.

Thy worship does not impoverish the world.

From the words of the poet men take what meanings please them; yet
their last meaning points to thee.




76.


Day after day, O lord of my life, shall I stand before thee face to
face. With folded hands, O lord of all worlds, shall I stand before
thee face to face.

Under thy great sky in solitude and silence, with humble heart shall I
stand before thee face to face.

In this laborious world of thine, tumultuous with toil and with
struggle, among hurrying crowds shall I stand before thee face to face.

And when my work shall be done in this world, O King of kings, alone
and speechless shall I stand before thee face to face.




77.


I know thee as my God and stand apart—I do not know thee as my own and
come closer. I know thee as my father and bow before thy feet—I do not
grasp thy hand as my friend’s.

I stand not where thou comest down and ownest thyself as mine, there to
clasp thee to my heart and take thee as my comrade.

Thou art the Brother amongst my brothers, but I heed them not, I divide
not my earnings with them, thus sharing my all with thee.

In pleasure and in pain I stand not by the side of men, and thus stand
by thee. I shrink to give up my life, and thus do not plunge into the
great waters of life.




78.


When the creation was new and all the stars shone in their first
splendour, the gods held their assembly in the sky and sang “Oh, the
picture of perfection! the joy unalloyed!”

But one cried of a sudden—“It seems that somewhere there is a break in
the chain of light and one of the stars has been lost.”

The golden string of their harp snapped, their song stopped, and they
cried in dismay—“Yes, that lost star was the best, she was the glory of
all heavens!”

From that day the search is unceasing for her, and the cry goes on from
one to the other that in her the world has lost its one joy!

Only in the deepest silence of night the stars smile and whisper among
themselves—“Vain is this seeking! unbroken perfection is over all!”




79.


If it is not my portion to meet thee in this life then let me ever feel
that I have missed thy sight—let me not forget for a moment, let me
carry the pangs of this sorrow in my dreams and in my wakeful hours.

As my days pass in the crowded market of this world and my hands grow
full with the daily profits, let me ever feel that I have gained
nothing—let me not forget for a moment, let me carry the pangs of this
sorrow in my dreams and in my wakeful hours.

When I sit by the roadside, tired and panting, when I spread my bed low
in the dust, let me ever feel that the long journey is still before
me—let me not forget a moment, let me carry the pangs of this sorrow in
my dreams and in my wakeful hours.

When my rooms have been decked out and the flutes sound and the
laughter there is loud, let me ever feel that I have not invited thee
to my house—let me not forget for a moment, let me carry the pangs of
this sorrow in my dreams and in my wakeful hours.




80.


I am like a remnant of a cloud of autumn uselessly roaming in the sky,
O my sun ever-glorious! Thy touch has not yet melted my vapour, making
me one with thy light, and thus I count months and years separated from
thee.

If this be thy wish and if this be thy play, then take this fleeting
emptiness of mine, paint it with colours, gild it with gold, float it
on the wanton wind and spread it in varied wonders.

And again when it shall be thy wish to end this play at night, I shall
melt and vanish away in the dark, or it may be in a smile of the white
morning, in a coolness of purity transparent.




81.


On many an idle day have I grieved over lost time. But it is never
lost, my lord. Thou hast taken every moment of my life in thine own
hands.

Hidden in the heart of things thou art nourishing seeds into sprouts,
buds into blossoms, and ripening flowers into fruitfulness.

I was tired and sleeping on my idle bed and imagined all work had
ceased. In the morning I woke up and found my garden full with wonders
of flowers.




82.


Time is endless in thy hands, my lord. There is none to count thy
minutes.

Days and nights pass and ages bloom and fade like flowers. Thou knowest
how to wait.

Thy centuries follow each other perfecting a small wild flower.

We have no time to lose, and having no time we must scramble for a
chances. We are too poor to be late.

And thus it is that time goes by while I give it to every querulous man
who claims it, and thine altar is empty of all offerings to the last.

At the end of the day I hasten in fear lest thy gate to be shut; but I
find that yet there is time.




83.


Mother, I shall weave a chain of pearls for thy neck with my tears of
sorrow.

The stars have wrought their anklets of light to deck thy feet, but
mine will hang upon thy breast.

Wealth and fame come from thee and it is for thee to give or to
withhold them. But this my sorrow is absolutely mine own, and when I
bring it to thee as my offering thou rewardest me with thy grace.




84.


It is the pang of separation that spreads throughout the world and
gives birth to shapes innumerable in the infinite sky.

It is this sorrow of separation that gazes in silence all nights from
star to star and becomes lyric among rustling leaves in rainy darkness
of July.

It is this overspreading pain that deepens into loves and desires, into
sufferings and joy in human homes; and this it is that ever melts and
flows in songs through my poet’s heart.




85.


When the warriors came out first from their master’s hall, where had
they hid their power? Where were their armour and their arms?

They looked poor and helpless, and the arrows were showered upon them
on the day they came out from their master’s hall.

When the warriors marched back again to their master’s hall where did
they hide their power?

They had dropped the sword and dropped the bow and the arrow; peace was
on their foreheads, and they had left the fruits of their life behind
them on the day they marched back again to their master’s hall.




86.


Death, thy servant, is at my door. He has crossed the unknown sea and
brought thy call to my home.

The night is dark and my heart is fearful—yet I will take up the lamp,
open my gates and bow to him my welcome. It is thy messenger who stands
at my door.

I will worship him placing at his feet the treasure of my heart.

He will go back with his errand done, leaving a dark shadow on my
morning; and in my desolate home only my forlorn self will remain as my
last offering to thee.




87.


In desperate hope I go and search for her in all the corners of my
room; I find her not.

My house is small and what once has gone from it can never be regained.

But infinite is thy mansion, my lord, and seeking her I have to come to
thy door.

I stand under the golden canopy of thine evening sky and I lift my
eager eyes to thy face.

I have come to the brink of eternity from which nothing can vanish—no
hope, no happiness, no vision of a face seen through tears.

Oh, dip my emptied life into that ocean, plunge it into the deepest
fullness. Let me for once feel that lost sweet touch in the allness of
the universe.




88.


Deity of the ruined temple! The broken strings of _Vina_ sing no more
your praise. The bells in the evening proclaim not your time of
worship. The air is still and silent about you.

In your desolate dwelling comes the vagrant spring breeze. It brings
the tidings of flowers—the flowers that for your worship are offered no
more.

Your worshipper of old wanders ever longing for favour still refused.
In the eventide, when fires and shadows mingle with the gloom of dust,
he wearily comes back to the ruined temple with hunger in his heart.

Many a festival day comes to you in silence, deity of the ruined
temple. Many a night of worship goes away with lamp unlit.

Many new images are built by masters of cunning art and carried to the
holy stream of oblivion when their time is come.

Only the deity of the ruined temple remains unworshipped in deathless
neglect.




89.


No more noisy, loud words from me—such is my master’s will. Henceforth
I deal in whispers. The speech of my heart will be carried on in
murmurings of a song.

Men hasten to the King’s market. All the buyers and sellers are there.
But I have my untimely leave in the middle of the day, in the thick of
work.

Let then the flowers come out in my garden, though it is not their
time; and let the midday bees strike up their lazy hum.

Full many an hour have I spent in the strife of the good and the evil,
but now it is the pleasure of my playmate of the empty days to draw my
heart on to him; and I know not why is this sudden call to what useless
inconsequence!




90.


On the day when death will knock at thy door what wilt thou offer to
him?

Oh, I will set before my guest the full vessel of my life—I will never
let him go with empty hands.

All the sweet vintage of all my autumn days and summer nights, all the
earnings and gleanings of my busy life will I place before him at the
close of my days when death will knock at my door.




91.


O thou the last fulfilment of life, Death, my death, come and whisper
to me!

Day after day I have kept watch for thee; for thee have I borne the
joys and pangs of life.

All that I am, that I have, that I hope and all my love have ever
flowed towards thee in depth of secrecy. One final glance from thine
eyes and my life will be ever thine own.

The flowers have been woven and the garland is ready for the
bridegroom. After the wedding the bride shall leave her home and meet
her lord alone in the solitude of night.




92.


I know that the day will come when my sight of this earth shall be
lost, and life will take its leave in silence, drawing the last curtain
over my eyes.

Yet stars will watch at night, and morning rise as before, and hours
heave like sea waves casting up pleasures and pains.

When I think of this end of my moments, the barrier of the moments
breaks and I see by the light of death thy world with its careless
treasures. Rare is its lowliest seat, rare is its meanest of lives.

Things that I longed for in vain and things that I got—let them pass.
Let me but truly possess the things that I ever spurned and overlooked.




93.


I have got my leave. Bid me farewell, my brothers! I bow to you all and
take my departure.

Here I give back the keys of my door—and I give up all claims to my
house. I only ask for last kind words from you.

We were neighbours for long, but I received more than I could give. Now
the day has dawned and the lamp that lit my dark corner is out. A
summons has come and I am ready for my journey.




94.


At this time of my parting, wish me good luck, my friends! The sky is
flushed with the dawn and my path lies beautiful.

Ask not what I have with me to take there. I start on my journey with
empty hands and expectant heart.

I shall put on my wedding garland. Mine is not the red-brown dress of
the traveller, and though there are dangers on the way I have no fear
in mind.

The evening star will come out when my voyage is done and the plaintive
notes of the twilight melodies be struck up from the King’s gateway.




95.


I was not aware of the moment when I first crossed the threshold of
this life.

What was the power that made me open out into this vast mystery like a
bud in the forest at midnight!

When in the morning I looked upon the light I felt in a moment that I
was no stranger in this world, that the inscrutable without name and
form had taken me in its arms in the form of my own mother.

Even so, in death the same unknown will appear as ever known to me. And
because I love this life, I know I shall love death as well.

The child cries out when from the right breast the mother takes it
away, in the very next moment to find in the left one its consolation.




96.


When I go from hence let this be my parting word, that what I have seen
is unsurpassable.

I have tasted of the hidden honey of this lotus that expands on the
ocean of light, and thus am I blessed—let this be my parting word.

In this playhouse of infinite forms I have had my play and here have I
caught sight of him that is formless.

My whole body and my limbs have thrilled with his touch who is beyond
touch; and if the end comes here, let it come—let this be my parting
word.




97.


When my play was with thee I never questioned who thou wert. I knew nor
shyness nor fear, my life was boisterous.

In the early morning thou wouldst call me from my sleep like my own
comrade and lead me running from glade to glade.

On those days I never cared to know the meaning of songs thou sangest
to me. Only my voice took up the tunes, and my heart danced in their
cadence.

Now, when the playtime is over, what is this sudden sight that is come
upon me? The world with eyes bent upon thy feet stands in awe with all
its silent stars.




98.


I will deck thee with trophies, garlands of my defeat. It is never in
my power to escape unconquered.

I surely know my pride will go to the wall, my life will burst its
bonds in exceeding pain, and my empty heart will sob out in music like
a hollow reed, and the stone will melt in tears.

I surely know the hundred petals of a lotus will not remain closed for
ever and the secret recess of its honey will be bared.

From the blue sky an eye shall gaze upon me and summon me in silence.
Nothing will be left for me, nothing whatever, and utter death shall I
receive at thy feet.




99.


When I give up the helm I know that the time has come for thee to take
it. What there is to do will be instantly done. Vain is this struggle.

Then take away your hands and silently put up with your defeat, my
heart, and think it your good fortune to sit perfectly still where you
are placed.

These my lamps are blown out at every little puff of wind, and trying
to light them I forget all else again and again.

But I shall be wise this time and wait in the dark, spreading my mat on
the floor; and whenever it is thy pleasure, my lord, come silently and
take thy seat here.




100.


I dive down into the depth of the ocean of forms, hoping to gain the
perfect pearl of the formless.

No more sailing from harbour to harbour with this my weather-beaten
boat. The days are long passed when my sport was to be tossed on waves.

And now I am eager to die into the deathless.

Into the audience hall by the fathomless abyss where swells up the
music of toneless strings I shall take this harp of my life.

I shall tune it to the notes of forever, and when it has sobbed out its
last utterance, lay down my silent harp at the feet of the silent.




101.


Ever in my life have I sought thee with my songs. It was they who led
me from door to door, and with them have I felt about me, searching and
touching my world.

It was my songs that taught me all the lessons I ever learnt; they
showed me secret paths, they brought before my sight many a star on the
horizon of my heart.

They guided me all the day long to the mysteries of the country of
pleasure and pain, and, at last, to what palace gate have they brought
me in the evening at the end of my journey?




102.


I boasted among men that I had known you. They see your pictures in all
works of mine. They come and ask me, “Who is he?” I know not how to
answer them. I say, “Indeed, I cannot tell.” They blame me and they go
away in scorn. And you sit there smiling.

I put my tales of you into lasting songs. The secret gushes out from my
heart. They come and ask me, “Tell me all your meanings.” I know not
how to answer them. I say, “Ah, who knows what they mean!” They smile
and go away in utter scorn. And you sit there smiling.




103.


In one salutation to thee, my God, let all my senses spread out and
touch this world at thy feet.

Like a rain-cloud of July hung low with its burden of unshed showers
let all my mind bend down at thy door in one salutation to thee.

Let all my songs gather together their diverse strains into a single
current and flow to a sea of silence in one salutation to thee.

Like a flock of homesick cranes flying night and day back to their
mountain nests let all my life take its voyage to its eternal home in
one salutation to thee.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GITANJALI ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Glimpses of Bengal
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Glimpses of Bengal

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: April 1, 2005 [eBook #7951]
                Most recently updated: May 7, 2013

Language: English

Credits: Text file produced by S.R.Ellison, Eric Eldred, and the Distributed
        Proofreading Team
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLIMPSES OF BENGAL ***




Produced by S.R.Ellison, Eric Eldred, and the Distributed
Proofreading Team








GLIMPSES OF BENGAL

SELECTED FROM THE LETTERS OF SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE

1885 TO 1895

By Sir Rabindranath Tagore




INTRODUCTION


The letters translated in this book span the most productive period of my
literary life, when, owing to great good fortune, I was young and less
known.

Youth being exuberant and leisure ample, I felt the writing of letters
other than business ones to be a delightful necessity. This is a form of
literary extravagance only possible when a surplus of thought and emotion
accumulates. Other forms of literature remain the author's and are made
public for his good; letters that have been given to private individuals
once for all, are therefore characterised by the more generous
abandonment.

It so happened that selected extracts from a large number of such letters
found their way back to me years after they had been written. It had been
rightly conjectured that they would delight me by bringing to mind the
memory of days when, under the shelter of obscurity, I enjoyed the
greatest freedom my life has ever known.

Since these letters synchronise with a considerable part of my published
writings, I thought their parallel course would broaden my readers'
understanding of my poems as a track is widened by retreading the same
ground. Such was my justification for publishing them in a book for my
countrymen. Hoping that the descriptions of village scenes in Bengal
contained in these letters would also be of interest to English readers,
the translation of a selection of that selection has been entrusted to one
who, among all those whom I know, was best fitted to carry it out.

RABINDRANATH TAGORE.

_20th June 1920._




BANDORA, BY THE SEA,

_October_ 1885.


The unsheltered sea heaves and heaves and blanches into foam. It sets me
thinking of some tied-up monster straining at its bonds, in front of whose
gaping jaws we build our homes on the shore and watch it lashing its tail.
What immense strength, with waves swelling like the muscles of a giant!

From the beginning of creation there has been this feud between land and
water: the dry earth slowly and silently adding to its domain and
spreading a broader and broader lap for its children; the ocean receding
step by step, heaving and sobbing and beating its breast in despair.
Remember the sea was once sole monarch, utterly free.

Land rose from its womb, usurped its throne, and ever since the maddened
old creature, with hoary crest of foam, wails and laments continually,
like King Lear exposed to the fury of the elements.


_July 1887._

I am in my twenty-seventh year. This event keeps thrusting itself before
my mind--nothing else seems to have happened of late.

But to reach twenty-seven--is that a trifling thing?--to pass the meridian
of the twenties on one's progress towards thirty?--thirty--that is to say
maturity--the age at which people expect fruit rather than fresh foliage.
But, alas, where is the promise of fruit? As I shake my head, it still
feels brimful of luscious frivolity, with not a trace of philosophy.

Folk are beginning to complain: "Where is that which we expected of
you--that in hope of which we admired the soft green of the shoot? Are we
to put up with immaturity for ever? It is high time for us to know what we
shall gain from you. We want an estimate of the proportion of oil which
the blindfold, mill-turning, unbiased critic can squeeze out of you."

It has ceased to be possible to delude these people into waiting
expectantly any longer. While I was under age they trustfully gave me
credit; it is sad to disappoint them now that I am on the verge of thirty.
But what am I to do? Words of wisdom will not come! I am utterly
incompetent to provide things that may profit the multitude. Beyond a
snatch of song, some tittle-tattle, a little merry fooling, I have been
unable to advance. And as the result, those who held high hopes will turn
their wrath on me; but did any one ever beg them to nurse these
expectations?

Such are the thoughts which assail me since one fine _Bysakh_ morning
I awoke amidst fresh breeze and light, new leaf and flower, to find that I
had stepped into my twenty-seventh year.




SHELIDAH, 1888.


Our house-boat is moored to a sandbank on the farther side of the river. A
vast expanse of sand stretches away out of sight on every side, with here
and there a streak, as of water, running across, though sometimes what
gleams like water is only sand.

Not a village, not a human being, not a tree, not a blade of grass--the
only breaks in the monotonous whiteness are gaping cracks which in places
show the layer of moist, black clay underneath.

Looking towards the East, there is endless blue above, endless white
beneath. Sky empty, earth empty too--the emptiness below hard and barren,
that overhead arched and ethereal--one could hardly find elsewhere such a
picture of stark desolation.

But on turning to the West, there is water, the currentless bend of the
river, fringed with its high bank, up to which spread the village groves
with cottages peeping through--all like an enchanting dream in the evening
light. I say "the evening light," because in the evening we wander out,
and so that aspect is impressed on my mind.




SHAZADPUR, 1890.


The magistrate was sitting in the verandah of his tent dispensing justice
to the crowd awaiting their turns under the shade of a tree. They set my
palanquin down right under his nose, and the young Englishman received me
courteously. He had very light hair, with darker patches here and there,
and a moustache just beginning to show. One might have taken him for a
white-haired old man but for his extremely youthful face. I asked him over
to dinner, but he said he was due elsewhere to arrange for a pig-sticking
party.

As I returned home, great black clouds came up and there was a terrific
storm with torrents of rain. I could not touch a book, it was impossible
to write, so in the I-know-not-what mood I wandered about from room to
room. It had become quite dark, the thunder was continually pealing, the
lightning gleaming flash after flash, and every now and then sudden gusts
of wind would get hold of the big _lichi_ tree by the neck and give
its shaggy top a thorough shaking. The hollow in front of the house soon
filled with water, and as I paced about, it suddenly struck me that I
ought to offer the shelter of the house to the magistrate.

I sent off an invitation; then after investigation I found the only spare
room encumbered with a platform of planks hanging from the beams, piled
with dirty old quilts and bolsters. Servants' belongings, an excessively
grimy mat, hubble-bubble pipes, tobacco, tinder, and two wooden chests
littered the floor, besides sundry packing-cases full of useless odds and
ends, such as a rusty kettle lid, a bottomless iron stove, a discoloured
old nickel teapot, a soup-plate full of treacle blackened with dust. In a
corner was a tub for washing dishes, and from nails in the wall hung moist
dish-clouts and the cook's livery and skull-cap. The only piece of
furniture was a rickety dressing-table with water stains, oil stains, milk
stains, black, brown, and white stains, and all kinds of mixed stains. The
mirror, detached from it, rested against another wall, and the drawers
were receptacles for a miscellaneous assortment of articles from soiled
napkins down to bottle wires and dust.

For a moment I was overwhelmed with dismay; then it was a case of--send
for the manager, send for the storekeeper, call up all the servants, get
hold of extra men, fetch water, put up ladders, unfasten ropes, pull down
planks, take away bedding, pick up broken glass bit by bit, wrench nails
from the wall one by one.--The chandelier falls and its pieces strew the
floor; pick them up again piece by piece.--I myself whisk the dirty mat
off the floor and out of the window, dislodging a horde of cockroaches,
messmates, who dine off my bread, my treacle, and the polish on my shoes.

The magistrate's reply is brought back; his tent is in an awful state and
he is coming at once. Hurry up! Hurry up! Presently comes the shout: "The
sahib has arrived." All in a flurry I brush the dust off hair, beard, and
the rest of myself, and as I go to receive him in the drawing-room, I try
to look as respectable as if I had been reposing there comfortably all the
afternoon.

I went through the shaking of hands and conversed with the magistrate
outwardly serene; still, misgivings about his accommodation would now and
then well up within. When at length I had to show my guest to his room, I
found it passable, and if the homeless cockroaches do not tickle the soles
of his feet, he may manage to get a night's rest.




KALIGRAM, 1891.


I am feeling listlessly comfortable and delightfully irresponsible.

This is the prevailing mood all round here. There is a river but it has no
current to speak of, and, lying snugly tucked up in its coverlet of
floating weeds, seems to think--"Since it is possible to get on without
getting along, why should I bestir myself to stir?" So the sedge which
lines the banks knows hardly any disturbance until the fishermen come with
their nets.

Four or five large-sized boats are moored near by, alongside each other.
On the upper deck of one the boatman is fast asleep, rolled up in a sheet
from head to foot. On another, the boatman--also basking in the
sun--leisurely twists some yarn into rope. On the lower deck in a third,
an oldish-looking, bare-bodied fellow is leaning over an oar, staring
vacantly at our boat.

Along the bank there are various other people, but why they come or go,
with the slowest of idle steps, or remain seated on their haunches
embracing their knees, or keep on gazing at nothing in particular, no one
can guess.

The only signs of activity are to be seen amongst the ducks, who, quacking
clamorously, thrust their heads under and bob up again to shake off the
water with equal energy, as if they repeatedly tried to explore the
mysteries below the surface, and every time, shaking their heads, had to
report, "Nothing there! Nothing there!"

The days here drowse all their twelve hours in the sun, and silently sleep
away the other twelve, wrapped in the mantle of darkness. The only thing
you want to do in a place like this is to gaze and gaze on the landscape,
swinging your fancies to and fro, alternately humming a tune and nodding
dreamily, as the mother on a winter's noonday, her back to the sun, rocks
and croons her baby to sleep.




KALIGRAM, 1891.


Yesterday, while I was giving audience to my tenants, five or six boys
made their appearance and stood in a primly proper row before me. Before I
could put any question their spokesman, in the choicest of high-flown
language, started: "Sire! the grace of the Almighty and the good fortune
of your benighted children have once more brought about your lordship's
auspicious arrival into this locality." He went on in this strain for
nearly half an hour. Here and there he would get his lesson wrong, pause,
look up at the sky, correct himself, and then go on again. I gathered that
their school was short of benches and stools. "For want of these
wood-built seats," as he put it, "we know not where to sit ourselves,
where to seat our revered teachers, or what to offer our most respected
inspector when he comes on a visit."

I could hardly repress a smile at this torrent of eloquence gushing from
such a bit of a fellow, which sounded specially out of place here, where
the ryots are given to stating their profoundly vital wants in plain and
direct vernacular, of which even the more unusual words get sadly twisted
out of shape. The clerks and ryots, however, seemed duly impressed, and
likewise envious, as though deploring their parents' omission to endow
them with so splendid a means of appealing to the _Zamindar_.

I interrupted the young orator before he had done, promising to arrange
for the necessary number of benches and stools. Nothing daunted, he
allowed me to have my say, then took up his discourse where he had left
it, finished it to the last word, saluted me profoundly, and marched off
his contingent. He probably would not have minded had I refused to supply
the seats, but after all his trouble in getting it by heart he would have
resented bitterly being robbed of any part of his speech. So, though it
kept more important business waiting, I had to hear him out.




NEARING SHAZADPUR,

_January_ 1891.


We left the little river of Kaligram, sluggish as the circulation in a
dying man, and dropped down the current of a briskly flowing stream which
led to a region where land and water seemed to merge in each other, river
and bank without distinction of garb, like brother and sister in infancy.

The river lost its coating of sliminess, scattered its current in many
directions, and spread out, finally, into a _beel_ (marsh), with here
a patch of grassy land and there a stretch of transparent water, reminding
me of the youth of this globe when through the limitless waters land had
just begun to raise its head, the separate provinces of solid and fluid as
yet undefined.

Round about where we have moored, the bamboo poles of fishermen are
planted. Kites hover ready to snatch up fish from the nets. On the ooze at
the water's edge stand the saintly-looking paddy birds in meditation. All
kinds of waterfowl abound. Patches of weeds float on the water. Here and
there rice-fields, untilled, untended,[1] rise from the moist, clay soil.
Mosquitoes swarm over the still waters....

[Footnote 1: On the rich river-side silt, rice seed is simply scattered
and the harvest reaped when ripe; nothing else has to be done.]

We start again at dawn this morning and pass through Kachikata, where the
waters of the _beel_ find an outlet in a winding channel only six or
seven yards wide, through which they rush swiftly. To get our unwieldy
house-boat through is indeed an adventure. The current hurries it along at
lightning speed, keeping the crew busy using their oars as poles to
prevent the boat being dashed against the banks. We thus come out again
into the open river.

The sky had been heavily clouded, a damp wind blowing, with occasional
showers of rain. The crew were all shivering with cold. Such wet and
gloomy days in the cold weather are eminently disagreeable, and I have
spent a wretched lifeless morning. At two in the afternoon the sun came
out, and since then it has been delightful. The banks are now high and
covered with peaceful groves and the dwellings of men, secluded and full
of beauty.

The river winds in and out, an unknown little stream in the inmost
_zenana_ of Bengal, neither lazy nor fussy; lavishing the wealth of
her affection on both sides, she prattles about common joys and sorrows
and the household news of the village girls, who come for water, and sit
by her side, assiduously rubbing their bodies to a glowing freshness with
their moistened towels.

This evening we have moored our boat in a lonely bend. The sky is clear.
The moon is at its full. Not another boat is to be seen. The moonlight
glimmers on the ripples. Solitude reigns on the banks. The distant village
sleeps, nestling within a thick fringe of trees. The shrill, sustained
chirp of the cicadas is the only sound.




SHAZADPUR,

_February_ 1891.


Just in front of my window, on the other side of the stream, a band of
gypsies have ensconced themselves, putting up bamboo frameworks covered
over with split-bamboo mats and pieces of cloth. There are only three of
these little structures, so low that you cannot stand upright inside.
Their life is lived in the open, and they only creep under these shelters
at night, to sleep huddled together.

That is always the gypsies' way: no home anywhere, no landlord to pay rent
to, wandering about as it pleases them with their children, their pigs,
and a dog or two; and on them the police keep a vigilant eye.

I frequently watch the doings of the family nearest me. They are dark but
good-looking, with fine, strongly-built bodies, like north-west country
folk. Their women are handsome, and have tall, slim, well-knit figures;
and with their free and easy movements, and natural independent airs, they
look to me like swarthy Englishwomen.

The man has just put the cooking-pot on the fire, and is now splitting
bamboos and weaving baskets. The woman first holds up a little mirror to
her face, then puts a deal of pains into wiping and rubbing it, over and
over again, with a moist piece of cloth; and then, the folds of her upper
garment adjusted and tidied, she goes, all spick and span, up to her man
and sits beside him, helping him now and then in his work.

These are truly children of the soil, born on it somewhere, bred by the
wayside, here, there, and everywhere, dying anywhere. Night and day under
the open sky, in the open air, on the bare ground, they lead a unique kind
of life; and yet work, love, children, and household duties--everything is
there.

They are not idle for a moment, but always doing something. Her own
particular task over, one woman plumps herself down behind another, unties
the knot of her hair and cleans and arranges it for her; and whether at
the same time they fall to talking over the domestic affairs of the three
little mat-covered households I cannot say for certain from this distance,
but shrewdly suspect it.

This morning a great disturbance invaded the peaceful gypsy settlement. It
was about half-past eight or nine. They were spreading out over the mat
roofs tattered quilts and sundry other rags, which serve them for beds, in
order to sun and air them. The pigs with their litters, lying in a hollow
all of a heap and looking like a dab of mud, had been routed out by the
two canine members of the family, who fell upon them and sent them roaming
in search of their breakfasts, squealing their annoyance at being
interrupted in enjoyment of the sun after the cold night. I was writing my
letter and absently looking out now and then when the hubbub suddenly
commenced.

I rose and went to the window, and found a crowd gathered round the gypsy
hermitage. A superior-looking personage was flourishing a stick and
indulging in the strongest language. The headman of the gypsies, cowed and
nervous, was apparently trying to offer explanations. I gathered that some
suspicious happenings in the locality had led to this visitation by a
police officer.

The woman, so far, had remained sitting, busily scraping lengths of split
bamboo as serenely as if she had been alone and no sort of row going on.
Suddenly, however, she sprang to her feet, advanced on the police officer,
gesticulated violently with her arms right in his face, and gave him, in
strident tones, a piece of her mind. In the twinkling of an eye
three-quarters of the officer's excitement had subsided; he tried to put
in a word or two of mild protest but did not get a chance, and so departed
crestfallen, a different man.

After he had retreated to a safe distance, he turned and shouted back:
"All I say is, you'll have to clear out from here!"

I thought my neighbours opposite would forthwith pack up their mats and
bamboos and move away with their bundles, pigs, and children. But there is
no sign of it yet. They are still nonchalantly engaged in splitting
bamboos, cooking food, or completing a toilet.




SHAZADPUR,

_February_ 1891.


The post office is in a part of our estate office building,--this is very
convenient, for we get our letters as soon as they arrive. Some evenings
the postmaster comes up to have a chat with me. I enjoy listening to his
yarns.

He talks of the most impossible things in the gravest possible manner.

Yesterday he was telling me in what great reverence people of this
locality hold the sacred river Ganges. If one of their relatives dies, he
said, and they have not the means of taking the ashes to the Ganges, they
powder a piece of bone from his funeral pyre and keep it till they come
across some one who, some time or other, has drunk of the Ganges. To him
they administer some of this powder, hidden in the usual offering of
_pán_[1], and thus are content to imagine that a portion of the
remains of their deceased relative has gained purifying contact with the
sacred water.

[Footnote 1: Spices wrapped in betel leaf.]

I smiled as I remarked: "This surely must be an invention."

He pondered deeply before he admitted after a pause: "Yes, it may be."




ON THE WAY.

_February_ 1891.


We have got past the big rivers and just turned into a little one.

The village women are standing in the water, bathing or washing clothes;
and some, in their dripping _saris_, with veils pulled well over
their faces, move homeward with their water vessels filled and clasped
against the left flank, the right arm swinging free. Children, covered all
over with clay, are sporting boisterously, splashing water on each other,
while one of them shouts a song, regardless of the tune.

Over the high banks, the cottage roofs and the tops of the bamboo clumps
are visible. The sky has cleared and the sun is shining. Remnants of
clouds cling to the horizon like fluffs of cotton wool. The breeze is
warmer.

There are not many boats in this little river; only a few dinghies, laden
with dry branches and twigs, are moving leisurely along to the tired
plash! plash! of their oars. At the river's edge the fishermen's nets are
hung out to dry between bamboo poles. And work everywhere seems to be over
for the day.




CHUHALI.

_June_ 1891.


I had been sitting out on the deck for more than a quarter of an hour when
heavy clouds rose in the west. They came up, black, tumbled, and tattered,
with streaks of lurid light showing through here and there. The little
boats scurried off into the smaller arm of the river and clung with their
anchors safely to its banks. The reapers took up the cut sheaves on their
heads and hied homewards; the cows followed, and behind them frisked the
calves waving their tails.

Then came an angry roar. Torn-off scraps of cloud hurried up from the
west, like panting messengers of evil tidings. Finally, lightning and
thunder, rain and storm, came on altogether and executed a mad dervish
dance. The bamboo clumps seemed to howl as the raging wind swept the
ground with them, now to the east, now to the west. Over all, the storm
droned like a giant snake-charmer's pipe, and to its rhythm swayed
hundreds and thousands of crested waves, like so many hooded snakes. The
thunder was incessant, as though a whole world was being pounded to pieces
away there behind the clouds.

With my chin resting on the ledge of an open window facing away from the
wind, I allowed my thoughts to take part in this terrible revelry; they
leapt into the open like a pack of schoolboys suddenly set free. When,
however, I got a thorough drenching from the spray of the rain, I had to
shut up the window and my poetising, and retire quietly into the darkness
inside, like a caged bird.




SHAZADPUR.

_June_ 1891.


From the bank to which the boat is tied a kind of scent rises out of the
grass, and the heat of the ground, given off in gasps, actually touches my
body. I feel that the warm, living Earth is breathing upon me, and that
she, also, must feel my breath.

The young shoots of rice are waving in the breeze, and the ducks are in
turn thrusting their heads beneath the water and preening their feathers.
There is no sound save the faint, mournful creaking of the gangway against
the boat, as she imperceptibly swings to and fro in the current.

Not far off there is a ferry. A motley crowd has assembled under the
banyan tree awaiting the boat's return; and as soon as it arrives, they
eagerly scramble in. I enjoy watching this for hours together. It is
market-day in the village on the other bank; that is why the ferry is so
busy. Some carry bundles of hay, some baskets, some sacks; some are going
to the market, others coming from it. Thus, in this silent noonday, the
stream of human activity slowly flows across the river between two
villages.

I sat wondering: Why is there always this deep shade of melancholy over
the fields arid river banks, the sky and the sunshine of our country? And
I came to the conclusion that it is because with us Nature is obviously
the more important thing. The sky is free, the fields limitless; and the
sun merges them into one blazing whole. In the midst of this, man seems so
trivial. He comes and goes, like the ferry-boat, from this shore to the
other; the babbling hum of his talk, the fitful echo of his song, is
heard; the slight movement of his pursuit of his own petty desires is seen
in the world's market-places: but how feeble, how temporary, how
tragically meaningless it all seems amidst the immense aloofness of the
Universe!

The contrast between the beautiful, broad, unalloyed peace of
Nature--calm, passive, silent, unfathomable,--and our own everyday
worries--paltry, sorrow-laden, strife-tormented, puts me beside myself as
I keep staring at the hazy, distant, blue line of trees which fringe the
fields across the river.

Where Nature is ever hidden, and cowers under mist and cloud, snow and
darkness, there man feels himself master; he regards his desires, his
works, as permanent; he wants to perpetuate them, he looks towards
posterity, he raises monuments, he writes biographies; he even goes the
length of erecting tombstones over the dead. So busy is he that he has not
time to consider how many monuments crumble, how often names are
forgotten!




SHAZADPUR.

_June_ 1891.


There was a great, big mast lying on the river bank, and some little
village urchins, with never a scrap of clothing, decided, after a long
consultation, that if it could be rolled along to the accompaniment of a
sufficient amount of vociferous clamour, it would be a new and altogether
satisfactory kind of game. The decision was no sooner come to than acted
upon, with a "_Shabash_, brothers! All together! Heave ho!" And at
every turn it rolled, there was uproarious laughter.

The demeanour of one girl in the party was very different. She was playing
with the boys for want of other companions, but she clearly viewed with
disfavour these loud and strenuous games. At last she stepped up to the
mast and, without a word, deliberately sat on it.

So rare a game to come to so abrupt a stop! Some of the players seemed to
resign themselves to giving it up as a bad job; and retiring a little way
off, they sulkily glared at the girl in her impassive gravity. One made as
if he would push her off, but even this did not disturb the careless ease
of her pose. The eldest lad came up to her and pointed to other equally
suitable places for taking a rest; at which she energetically shook her
head, and putting her hands in her lap, steadied herself down still more
firmly on her seat. Then at last they had recourse to physical argument
and were completely successful.

Once again joyful shouts rent the skies, and the mast rolled along so
gloriously that even the girl had to cast aside her pride and her
dignified exclusiveness and make a pretence of joining in the unmeaning
excitement. But one could see all the time that she was sure boys never
know how to play properly, and are always so childish! If only she had the
regulation yellow earthen doll handy, with its big, black top-knot, would
she ever have deigned to join in this silly game with these foolish boys?

All of a sudden the idea of another splendid pastime occurred to the boys.
Two of them got hold of a third by the arms and legs and began to swing
him. This must have been great fun, for they all waxed enthusiastic over
it. But it was more than the girl could stand, so she disdainfully left
the playground and marched off home.

Then there was an accident. The boy who was being swung was let fall. He
left his companions in a pet, and went and lay down on the grass with his
arms crossed under his head, desiring to convey thereby that never again
would he have anything to do with this bad, hard world, but would forever
lie, alone by himself, with his arms under his head, and count the stars
and watch the play of the clouds.

The eldest boy, unable to bear the idea of such untimely
world-renunciation, ran up to the disconsolate one and taking his head on
his own knees repentantly coaxed him. "Come, my little brother! Do get up,
little brother! Have we hurt you, little brother?" And before long I found
them playing, like two pups, at catching and snatching away each other's
hands! Two minutes had hardly passed before the little fellow was swinging
again.




SHAZADPUR,

_June_ 1891.


I had a most extraordinary dream last night. The whole of Calcutta seemed
enveloped in some awful mystery, the houses being only dimly visible
through a dense, dark mist, within the veil of which there were strange
doings.

I was going along Park Street in a hackney carriage, and as I passed St.
Xavier's College I found it had started growing rapidly and was fast
getting impossibly high within its enveloping haze. Then it was borne in
on me that a band of magicians had come to Calcutta who, if they were paid
for it, could bring about many such wonders.

When I arrived at our Jorasanko house, I found these magicians had turned
up there too. They were ugly-looking, of a Mongolian type, with scanty
moustaches and a few long hairs sticking out of their chins. They could
make men grow. Some of the girls wanted to be made taller, and the
magician sprinkled some powder over their heads and they promptly shot up.
To every one I met I kept repeating: "This is most extraordinary,--just
like a dream!"

Then some one proposed that our house should be made to grow. The
magicians agreed, and as a preliminary began to take down some portions.
The dismantling over, they demanded money, or else they would not go on.
The cashier strongly objected. How could payment be made before the work
was completed? At this the magicians got wild and twisted up the building
most fearsomely, so that men and brickwork got mixed together, bodies
inside walls and only head and shoulders showing.

It had altogether the look of a thoroughly devilish business, as I told my
eldest brother. "You see," said I, "the kind of thing it is. We had better
call upon God to help us!" But try as I might to anathematise them in the
name of God, my heart felt like breaking and no words would come. Then I
awoke.

A curious dream, was it not? Calcutta in the hands of Satan and growing
diabolically, within the darkness of an unholy mist!




SHAZADPUR,

_June_ 1891.


The schoolmasters of this place paid me a visit yesterday.

They stayed on and on, while for the life of me I could not find a word to
say. I managed a question or so every five minutes, to which they offered
the briefest replies; and then I sat vacantly, twirling my pen, and
scratching my head.

At last I ventured on a question about the crops, but being schoolmasters
they knew nothing whatever about crops.

About their pupils I had already asked them everything I could think of,
so I had to start over again: How many boys had they in the school? One
said eighty, another said a hundred and seventy-five. I hoped that this
might lead to an argument, but no, they made up their difference.

Why, after an hour and a half, they should have thought of taking leave, I
cannot tell. They might have done so with as good a reason an hour
earlier, or, for the matter of that, twelve hours later! Their decision
was clearly arrived at empirically, entirely without method.




SHAZADPUR,

_July_ 1891.


There is another boat at this landing-place, and on the shore in front of
it a crowd of village women. Some are evidently embarking on a journey and
the others seeing them off; infants, veils, and grey hairs are all mixed
up in the gathering.

One girl in particular attracts my attention. She must be about eleven or
twelve; but, buxom and sturdy, she might pass for fourteen or fifteen. She
has a winsome face--very dark, but very pretty. Her hair is cut short like
a boy's, which well becomes her simple, frank, and alert expression. She
has a child in her arms and is staring at me with unabashed curiosity, and
certainly no lack of straightforwardness or intelligence in her glance.
Her half-boyish, half-girlish manner is singularly attractive--a novel
blend of masculine nonchalance and feminine charm. I had no idea there
were such types among our village women in Bengal.

None of this family, apparently, is troubled with too much bashfulness.
One of them has unfastened her hair in the sun and is combing it out with
her fingers, while conversing about their domestic affairs at the top of
her voice with another, on board. I gather she has no other children
except a girl, a foolish creature who knows neither how to behave or talk,
nor even the difference between kin and stranger. I also learn that
Gopal's son-in-law has turned out a ne'er-do-well, and that his daughter
refuses to go to her husband.

When, at length, it was time to start, they escorted my short-haired
damsel, with plump shapely arms, her gold bangles and her guileless,
radiant face, into the boat. I could divine that she was returning from
her father's to her husband's home. They all stood there, following the
boat with their gaze as it cast off, one or two wiping their eyes with the
loose end of their _saris_. A little girl, with her hair tightly tied
into a knot, clung to the neck of an older woman and silently wept on her
shoulder. Perhaps she was losing a darling Didimani [1] who joined in her
doll games and also slapped her when she was naughty....

[Footnote 1: An elder sister is often called sister-jewel
(_Didimani_).]

The quiet floating away of a boat on the stream seems to add to the pathos
of a separation--it is so like death--the departing one lost to sight,
those left behind returning to their daily life, wiping their eyes. True,
the pang lasts but a while, and is perhaps already wearing off both in
those who have gone and those who remain,--pain being temporary, oblivion
permanent. But none the less it is not the forgetting, but the pain which
is true; and every now and then, in separation or in death, we realise how
terribly true.




ON BOARD A CANAL STEAMER GOING TO CUTTACK,

_August_ 1891.


My bag left behind, my clothes daily get more and more intolerably
disreputable,--this thought continually uppermost is not compatible with a
due sense of self-respect. With the bag I could have faced the world of
men head erect and spirits high; without it, I fain would skulk in
corners, away from the glances of the crowd. I go to bed in these clothes
and in them I appear in the morning, and on the top of that the steamer is
full of soot, and the unbearable heat of the day keeps one unpleasantly
moist.

Apart from this, I am having quite a time of it on board the steamer. My
fellow-passengers are of inexhaustible variety. There is one, Aghore Babu,
who cannot allude to anything, animate or inanimate, except in terms of
personal abuse. There is another, a lover of music, who persists in
attempting variations on the Bhairab[1] mode at dead of night, convincing
me of the untimeliness of his performance in more senses than one.

[Footnote: A Raga, or mode of Indian classical music, supposed to be
appropriate to the early dawn.]

The steamer has been aground in a narrow ditch of a canal ever since last
evening, and it is now past nine in the morning. I spent the night in a
corner of the crowded deck, more dead than alive. I had asked the steward
to fry some _luchis_ for my dinner, and he brought me some
nondescript slabs of fried dough with no vegetable accompaniments to eat
them with. On my expressing a pained surprise, he was all contrition and
offered to make me some hotch-potch at once. But the night being already
far advanced, I declined his offer, managed to swallow a few mouthfuls of
the stuff dry, and then, all lights on and the deck packed with
passengers, laid myself down to sleep.

Mosquitoes hovered above, cockroaches wandered around. There was a
fellow-sleeper stretched crosswise at my feet whose body my soles every
now and then came up against. Four or five noses were engaged in snoring.
Several mosquito-tormented, sleepless wretches were consoling themselves
by pulls at their hubble-bubble pipes; and above all, there rose those
variations on the mode _Bhairab_! Finally, at half-past three in the
morning, some fussy busy-bodies began loudly inciting each other to get
up. In despair, I also left my bed and dropped into my deck-chair to await
the dawn. Thus passed that variegated nightmare of a night.

One of the hands tells me that the steamer has stuck so fast that it may
take the whole day to get her off. I inquire of another whether any
Calcutta-bound steamer will be passing, and get the smiling reply that
this is the only boat on this line, and I may come back in her, if I like,
after she has reached Cuttack! By a stroke of luck, after a great deal of
tugging and hauling, they have just got her afloat at about ten o'clock.




TIRAN.

7_th September_ 1891.


The landing-place at Balia makes a pretty picture with its fine big trees
on either side, and on the whole the canal somehow reminds me of the
little river at Poona. On thinking it over I am sure I should have liked
the canal much better had it really been a river.

Cocoanut palms as well as mangoes and other shady trees line its banks,
which, turfed with beautifully green grass, slope gently down to the
water, and are sprinkled over with sensitive plants in flower. Here and
there are screwpine groves, and through gaps in the border of trees
glimpses can be caught of endless fields, stretching away into the
distance, their crops so soft and velvety after the rains that the eye
seems to sink into their depths. Then again, there are the little villages
under their clusters of cocoanut and date palms, nestling under the moist
cool shade of the low seasonal clouds.

Through all these the canal, with its gentle current, winds gracefully
between its clean, grassy banks, fringed, in its narrower stretches, with
clusters of water-lilies with reeds growing among them. And yet the mind
keeps fretting at the idea that after all it is nothing but an artificial
canal.

The murmur of its waters does not reach back to the beginning of time. It
knows naught of the mysteries of some distant, inaccessible mountain cave.
It has not flowed for ages, graced with an old-world feminine name, giving
the villages on its sides the milk of its breast. Even old artificial
lakes have acquired a greater dignity.

However when, a hundred years hence, the trees on its banks will have
grown statelier; its brand-new milestones been worn down and moss-covered
into mellowness; the date 1871, inscribed on its lock-gates, left behind
at a respectable distance; then, if I am reborn as my great-grandson and
come again to inspect the Cuttack estates along this canal, I may feel
differently towards it.




SHELIDAH,

_October_ 1891.


Boat after boat touches at the landing-place, and after a whole year
exiles are returning home from distant fields of work for the Poojah
vacation, their boxes, baskets, and bundles loaded with presents. I notice
one who, as his boat nears the shore, changes into a freshly folded and
crinkled muslin _dhoti_, dons over his cotton tunic a China silk
coat, carefully adjusts round his neck a neatly twisted scarf, and walks
off towards the village, umbrella held aloft.

Rustling waves pass over the rice-fields. Mango and cocoanut tree-tops
rise into the sky, and beyond them there are fluffy clouds on the horizon.
The fringes of the palm leaves wave in the breeze. The reeds on the
sand-bank are on the point of flowering. It is altogether an exhilarating
scene.

The feelings of the man who has just arrived home, the eager expectancy of
his folk awaiting him, this autumn sky, this world, the gentle morning
breeze, the universal responsive tremor in tree and shrub and in the
wavelets on the river, conspire to overwhelm this lonely youth, gazing
from his window, with unutterable joys and sorrows.

Glimpses of the world received from wayside windows bring new desires, or
rather, make old desires take on new forms. The day before yesterday, as I
was sitting at the window of the boat, a little fisher-dinghy floated
past, the boatman singing a song--not a very tuneful song. But it reminded
me of a night, years ago, when I was a child. We were going along the
Padma in a boat. I awoke one night at about 2 o'clock, and, on raising the
window and putting out my head, I saw the waters without a ripple,
gleaming in the moonlight, and a youth in a little dinghy paddling along
all by himself and singing, oh so sweetly,--such sweet melody I had never
heard before.

A sudden longing came upon me to go back to the day of that song; to be
allowed to make another essay at life, this time not to leave it thus
empty and unsatisfied; but with a poet's song on my lips to float about
the world on the crest of the rising tide, to sing it to men and subdue
their hearts; to see for myself what the world holds and where; to let men
know me, to get to know them; to burst forth through the world in life and
youth like the eager rushing breezes; and then return home to a fulfilled
and fruitful old age to spend it as a poet should.

Not a very lofty ideal, is it? To benefit the world would have been much
higher, no doubt; but being on the whole what I am, that ambition does not
even occur to me. I cannot make up my mind to sacrifice this precious gift
of life in a self-wrought famine, and disappoint the world and the hearts
of men by fasts and meditations and constant argument. I count it enough
to live and die as a man, loving and trusting the world, unable to look on
it either as a delusion of the Creator or a snare of the Devil. It is not
for me to strive to be wafted away into the airiness of an Angel.




SHELIDAH,

2_nd Kartik_ (_October_) 1891.


When I come to the country I cease to view man as separate from the rest.
As the river runs through many a clime, so does the stream of men babble
on, winding through woods and villages and towns. It is not a true
contrast that _men may come and men may go, but I go on for ever_.
Humanity, with all its confluent streams, big and small, flows on and on,
just as does the river, from its source in birth to its sea of death;--two
dark mysteries at either end, and between them various play and work and
chatter unceasing.

Over there the cultivators sing in the fields: here the fishing-boats
float by. The day wears on and the heat of the sun increases. Some bathers
are still in the river, others are finished and are taking home their
filled water-vessels. Thus, past both banks of the river, hundreds of
years have hummed their way, while the refrain rises in a mournful chorus:
_I go on for ever!_

Amid the noonday silence some youthful cowherd is heard calling at the top
of his voice for his companion; some boat splashes its way homewards; the
ripples lap against the empty jar which some village woman rests on the
water before dipping it; and with these mingle several other less definite
sounds,--the twittering of birds, the humming of bees, the plaintive
creaking of the house-boat as it gently swings to and fro,--the whole
making a tender lullaby, as of a mother trying to quiet a suffering child.
"Fret not," she sings, as she soothingly pats its fevered forehead. "Worry
not; weep no more. Let be your strugglings and grabbings and fightings;
forget a while, sleep a while."




SHELIDAH,

3_rd Kartik_ (_October_) 1891.


It was the _Kojagar_ full moon, and I was slowly pacing the riverside
conversing with myself. It could hardly be called a conversation, as I was
doing all the talking and my imaginary companion all the listening. The
poor fellow had no chance of speaking up for himself, for was not mine the
power to compel him helplessly to answer like a fool?

But what a night it was! How often have I tried to write of such, but
never got it done! There was not a line of ripple on the river; and from
away over there, where the farthest shore of the distant main stream is
seen beyond the other edge of the midway belt of sand, right up to this
shore, glimmers a broad band of moonlight. Not a human being, not a boat
in sight; not a tree, nor blade of grass on the fresh-formed island
sand-bank.

It seemed as though a desolate moon was rising upon a devastated earth; a
random river wandering through a lifeless solitude; a long-drawn
fairy-tale coming to a close over a deserted world,--all the kings and the
princesses, their ministers and friends and their golden castles vanished,
leaving the Seven Seas and Thirteen Rivers and the Unending Moor, over
which the adventurous princes fared forth, wanly gleaming in the pale
moonlight. I was pacing up and down like the last pulse-beats of this
dying world. Every one else seemed to be on the opposite shore--the shore
of life--where the British Government and the Nineteenth Century hold
sway, and tea and cigarettes.




SHELIDAH,

9_th January_ 1892.


For some days the weather here has been wavering between Winter and
Spring. In the morning, perhaps, shivers will run over both land and water
at the touch of the north wind; while the evening will thrill with the
south breeze coming through the moonlight.

There is no doubt that Spring is well on its way. After a long interval
the _papiya_ once more calls out from the groves on the opposite
bank. The hearts of men too are stirred; and after evening falls, sounds
of singing are heard in the village, showing that they are no longer in
such a hurry to close doors and windows and cover themselves up snugly for
the night.

To-night the moon is at its full, and its large, round face peers at me
through the open window on my left, as if trying to make out whether I
have anything to say against it in my letter,--it suspects, maybe, that we
mortals concern ourselves more with its stains than its beams.

A bird is plaintively crying tee-tee on the sand-bank. The river seems not
to move. There are no boats. The motionless groves on the bank cast an
unquivering shadow on the waters. The haze over the sky makes the moon
look like a sleepy eye kept open.

Henceforward the evenings will grow darker and darker; and when,
to-morrow, I come over from the office, this moon, the favourite companion
of my exile, will already have drifted a little farther from me, doubting
whether she had been wise to lay her heart so completely bare last
evening, and so covering it up again little by little.

Nature becomes really and truly intimate in strange and lonely places. I
have been actually worrying myself for days at the thought that after the
moon is past her full I shall daily miss the moonlight more and more;
feeling further and further exiled when the beauty and peace which awaits
my return to the riverside will no longer be there, and I shall have to
come back through darkness.

Anyhow I put it on record that to-day is the full moon--the first full
moon of this year's springtime. In years to come I may perchance be
reminded of this night, with the tee-tee of the bird on the bank, the
glimmer of the distant light on the boat off the other shore, the shining
expanse of river, the blur of shade thrown by the dark fringe of trees
along its edge, and the white sky gleaming overhead in unconcerned
aloofness.




SHELIDAH,

7_th April_ 1892.


The river is getting low, and the water in this arm of it is hardly more
than waist-deep anywhere. So it is not at all extraordinary that the boat
should be anchored in mid-stream. On the bank, to my right, the ryots are
ploughing and cows are now and then brought down to the water's edge for a
drink. To the left there are the mango and cocoanut trees of the old
Shelidah garden above, and on the bathing slope below there are village
women washing clothes, filling water jars, bathing, laughing and gossiping
in their provincial dialect.

The younger girls never seem to get through their sporting in the water;
it is a delight to hear their careless, merry laughter. The men gravely
take their regulation number of dips and go away, but girls are on much
more intimate terms with the water. Both alike babble and chatter and
ripple and sparkle in the same simple and natural manner; both may
languish and fade away under a scorching glare, yet both can take a blow
without hopelessly breaking under it. The hard world, which, but for them,
would be barren, cannot fathom the mystery of the soft embrace of their
arms.

Tennyson has it that woman to man is as water to wine. I feel to-day it
should be as water is to land. Woman is more at home with the water,
laving in it, playing with it, holding her gatherings beside it; and
while, for her, other burdens are not seemly, the carrying of water from
the spring, the well, the bank of river or pool, has ever been held to
become her.




BOLPUR,

2_nd May_ 1892.


There are many paradoxes in the world and one of them is this, that
wherever the landscape is immense, the sky unlimited, clouds intimately
dense, feelings unfathomable--that is to say where infinitude is
manifest--its fit companion is one solitary person; a multitude there
seems so petty, so distracting.

An individual and the infinite are on equal terms, worthy to gaze on one
another, each from his own throne. But where many men are, how small both
humanity and infinitude become, how much they have to knock off each
other, in order to fit in together! Each soul wants so much room to expand
that in a crowd it needs must wait for gaps through which to thrust a
little craning piece of a head from time to time.

So the only result of our endeavour to assemble is that we become unable
to fill our joined hands, our outstretched arms, with this endless,
fathomless expanse.




BOLPUR,

8_th Jaistha_ (_May_) 1892.


Women who try to be witty, but only succeed in being pert, are
insufferable; and as for attempts to be comic they are disgraceful in
women whether they succeed or fail. The comic is ungainly and exaggerated,
and so is in some sort related to the sublime. The elephant is comic, the
camel and the giraffe are comic, all overgrowth is comic.

It is rather keenness that is akin to beauty, as the thorn to the flower.
So sarcasm is not unbecoming in woman, though coming from her it hurts.
But ridicule which savours of bulkiness woman had better leave to our
sublime sex. The masculine Falstaff makes our sides split, but a feminine
Falstaff would only rack our nerves.




BOLPUR,

12_th Jaistha_ (_May_) 1892.


I usually pace the roof-terrace, alone, of an evening. Yesterday afternoon
I felt it my duty to show my visitors the beauties of the local scenery,
so I strolled out with them, taking Aghore as a guide.

On the verge of the horizon, where the distant fringe of trees was blue, a
thin line of dark blue cloud had risen over them and was looking
particularly beautiful. I tried to be poetical and said it was like blue
collyrium on the fringe of lashes enhancing a beautiful blue eye. Of my
companions one did not hear the remark, another did not understand, while
the third dismissed it with the reply: "Yes, very pretty." I did not feel
encouraged to attempt a second poetical flight.

After walking about a mile we came to a dam, and along the pool of water
there was a row of _tâl_ (fan palm) trees, under which was a natural
spring. While we stood there looking at this, we found that the line of
cloud which we had seen in the North was making for us, swollen and grown
darker, flashes of lightning gleaming the while.

We unanimously came to the conclusion that viewing the beauties of nature
could be better done from within the shelter of the house, but no sooner
had we turned homewards than a storm, making giant strides over the open
moorland, was on us with an angry roar. I had no idea, while I was
admiring the collyrium on the eyelashes of beauteous dame Nature, that she
would fly at us like an irate housewife, threatening so tremendous a slap!

It became so dark with the dust that we could not see beyond a few paces.
The fury of the storm increased, and flying stony particles of the rubbly
soil stung our bodies like shot, as the wind took us by the scruff of the
neck and thrust us along, to the whipping of drops of rain which had begun
to fall.

Run! Run! But the ground was not level, being deeply scarred with
watercourses, and not easy to cross at any time, much less in a storm. I
managed to get entangled in a thorny shrub, and was nearly thrown on my
face by the force of the wind as I stopped to free myself.

When we had almost reached the house, a host of servants came hurrying
towards us, shouting and gesticulating, and fell upon us like another
storm. Some took us by the arms, some bewailed our plight, some were eager
to show the way, others hung on our backs as if fearing that the storm
might carry us off altogether. We evaded their attentions with some
difficulty and managed at length to get into the house, panting, with wet
clothes, dusty bodies, and tumbled hair.

One thing I had learnt; and will never again write in novel or story the
lie that the hero with the picture of his lady-love in his mind can pass
unruffled through wind and rain. No one could keep any face in mind,
however lovely, in such a storm,--he has enough to do to keep the sand out
of his eyes!...

The Vaishnava-poets have sung ravishingly of Radha going to her tryst with
Krishna through a stormy night. Did they ever pause to consider, I wonder,
in what condition she must have reached him? The kind of tangle her hair
got into is easily imaginable, and also the state of the rest of her
toilet. When she arrived in her bower with the dust on her body soaked by
the rain into a coating of mud, she must have been a sight!

But when we read the Vaishnava poems, these thoughts do not occur. We only
see on the canvas of our mind the picture of a beautiful woman, passing
under the shelter of the flowering kadambas in the darkness of a stormy
_Shravan_[1] night, towards the bank of the Jumna, forgetful of wind
or rain, as in a dream, drawn by her surpassing love. She has tied up her
anklets lest they should tinkle; she is clad in dark blue raiment lest she
be discovered; but she holds no umbrella lest she get wet, carries no
lantern lest she fall!

[Footnote 1: July-August, the rainy season.]

Alas for useful things--how necessary in practical life, how neglected in
poetry! But poetry strives in vain to free us from their bondage--they
will be with us always; so much so, we are told, that with the march of
civilisation it is poetry that will become extinct, but patent after
patent will continue to be taken out for the improvement of shoes and
umbrellas.




BOLPUR,

16_th Jaistha (May)_ 1892.


No church tower clock chimes here, and there being no other human
habitation near by, complete silence falls with the evening, as soon as
the birds have ceased their song. There is not much difference between
early night and midnight. A sleepless night in Calcutta flows like a huge,
slow river of darkness; one can count the varied sounds of its passing,
lying on one's back in bed. But here the night is like a vast, still lake,
placidly reposing, with no sign of movement. And as I tossed from side to
side last night I felt enveloped within a dense stagnation.

This morning I left my bed a little later than usual and, coming
downstairs to my room, leant back on a bolster, one leg resting over the
other knee. There, with a slate on my chest, I began to write a poem to
the accompaniment of the morning breeze and the singing birds. I was
getting along splendidly--a smile playing over my lips, my eyes half
closed, my head swaying to the rhythm, the thing I hummed gradually taking
shape--when the post arrived.

There was a letter, the last number of the _Sadhana Magazine_, one of
the _Monist_, and some proof-sheets. I read the letter, raced my eyes
over the uncut pages of the _Sadhana_, and then again fell to nodding
and humming through my poem. I did not do another thing till I had
finished it.

I wonder why the writing of pages of prose does not give one anything like
the joy of completing a single poem. One's emotions take on such
perfection of form in a poem; they can, as it were, be taken up by the
fingers. But prose is like a sackful of loose material, heavy and
unwieldy, incapable of being lifted as you please.

If I could finish writing one poem a day, my life would pass in a kind of
joy; but though I have been busy tending poetry for many a year it has not
been tamed yet, and is not the kind of winged steed to allow me to bridle
it whenever I like! The joy of art is in freedom to take a distant flight
as fancy will; then, even after return within the prison-world, an echo
lingers in the ear, an exaltation in the mind.

Short poems keep coming to me unsought, and so prevent my getting on with
the play. Had it not been for these, I could have let in ideas for two or
three plays which have been knocking at the door. I am afraid I must wait
for the cold weather. All my plays except "Chitra" were written in the
winter. In that season lyrical fervour is apt to grow cold, and one gets
the leisure to write drama.




BOLPUR,

_31st May 1892._


It is not yet five o'clock, but the light has dawned, there is a
delightful breeze, and all the birds in the garden are awake and have
started singing. The _koel_ seems beside itself. It is difficult to
understand why it should keep on cooing so untiringly. Certainly not to
entertain us, nor to distract the pining lover[1]--it must have some
personal purpose of its own. But, sadly enough, that purpose never seems
to get fulfilled. Yet it is not down-hearted, and its Coo-oo! Coo-oo!
keeps going, with now and then an ultra-fervent trill. What can it mean?

[Footnote 1: A favourite conceit of the old Sanskrit poets.]

And then in the distance there is some other bird with only a faint
chuck-chuck that has no energy or enthusiasm, as if all hope were lost;
none the less, from within some shady nook it cannot resist uttering this
little plaint: chuck, chuck, chuck.

How little we really know of the household affairs of these innocent
winged creatures, with their soft, breasts and necks and their
many-coloured feathers! Why on earth do they find it necessary to sing so
persistently?




SHELIDAH,

_31st Jaistha (June)1892._


I hate these polite formalities. Nowadays I keep repeating the line: "Much
rather would I be an Arab Bedouin!" A fine, healthy, strong, and free
barbarity.

I feel I want to quit this constant ageing of mind and body, with
incessant argument and nicety concerning ancient decaying things, and to
feel the joy of a free and vigorous life; to have,--be they good or
bad,--broad, unhesitating, unfettered ideas and aspirations, free from
everlasting friction between custom and sense, sense and desire, desire
and action.

If only I could set utterly and boundlessly free this hampered life of
mine, I would storm the four quarters and raise wave upon wave of tumult
all round; I would career away madly, like a wild horse, for very joy of
my own speed! But I am a Bengali, not a Bedouin! I go on sitting in my
corner, and mope and worry and argue. I turn my mind now this way up, now
the other--as a fish is fried--and the boiling oil blisters first this
side, then that.

Let it pass. Since I cannot be thoroughly wild, it is but proper that I
should make an endeavour to be thoroughly civil. Why foment a quarrel
between the two?




SHELIDAH,

_16th June 1892._


The more one lives alone on the river or in the open country, the clearer
it becomes that nothing is more beautiful or great than to perform the
ordinary duties of one's daily life simply and naturally. From the grasses
in the field to the stars in the sky, each one is doing just that; and
there is such profound peace and surpassing beauty in nature because none
of these tries forcibly to transgress its limitations.

Yet what each one does is by no means of little moment. The grass has to
put forth all its energy to draw sustenance from the uttermost tips of its
rootlets simply to grow where it is as grass; it does not vainly strive to
become a banyan tree; and so the earth gains a lovely carpet of green.
And, indeed, what little of beauty and peace is to be found in the
societies of men is owing to the daily performance of small duties, not to
big doings and fine talk.

Perhaps because the whole of our life is not vividly present at each
moment, some imaginary hope may lure, some glowing picture of a future,
untrammelled with everyday burdens, may tempt us; but these are illusory.




SHELIDAH,

_2nd Asarh (June) 1892._


Yesterday, the first day of _Asarh_,[1] the enthronement of the rainy
season was celebrated with due pomp and circumstance. It was very hot the
whole day, but in the afternoon dense clouds rolled up in stupendous
masses.

[Footnote 1: June-July, the commencement of the rainy season.]

I thought to myself, this first day of the rains, I would rather risk
getting wet than remain confined in my dungeon of a cabin.

The year 1293 [1] will not come again in my life, and,
for the matter of that, how many more even of these first days
of _Asarh_ will come? My life would be sufficiently long could it
number thirty of these first days of _Asarh_ to which the poet of the
_Meghaduta_[2] has, for me at least, given special distinction.

[Footnote 1: Of the Bengal era.]

[Footnote 2: In the _Meghaduta_ (Cloud Messenger) of Kalidas a famous
description of the burst of the Monsoon begins with the words: _On the
first day of Asarh_.]

It sometimes strikes me how immensely fortunate I am that each day should
take its place in my life, either reddened with the rising and setting
sun, or refreshingly cool with deep, dark clouds, or blooming like a white
flower in the moonlight. What untold wealth!

A thousand years ago Kalidas welcomed that first day of _Asarh_; and
once in every year of my life that same day of _Asarh_ dawns in all
its glory--that self-same day of the poet of old Ujjain, which has brought
to countless men and women their joys of union, their pangs of separation.

Every year one such great, time-hallowed day drops out of my life; and the
time will come when this day of Kalidas, this day of the _Meghaduta_,
this eternal first day of the Rains in Hindustan, shall come no more for
me. When I realise this I feel I want to take a good look at nature, to
offer a conscious welcome to each day's sunrise, to say farewell to each
day's setting sun, as to an intimate friend.

What a grand festival, what a vast theatre of festivity! And we cannot
even fully respond to it, so far away do we live from the world! The light
of the stars travels millions of miles to reach the earth, but it cannot
reach our hearts--so many millions of miles further off are we!

The world into which I have tumbled is peopled with strange beings. They
are always busy erecting walls and rules round themselves, and how careful
they are with their curtains lest they should see! It is a wonder to me
they have not made drab covers for flowering plants and put up a canopy to
ward off the moon. If the next life is determined by the desires of this,
then I should be reborn from our enshrouded planet into some free and open
realm of joy.

Only those who cannot steep themselves in beauty to the full, despise it
as an object of the senses. But those who have tasted of its
inexpressibility know how far it is beyond the highest powers of mere eye
or ear--nay, even the heart is powerless to attain the end of its
yearning.

_P.S._--I have left out the very thing I started to tell of. Don't be
afraid, it won't take four more sheets. It is this, that on the evening of
the first day of _Asarh_ it came on to rain very heavily, in great
lance-like showers. That is all.




ON THE WAY TO GOALUNDA,

_21st June 1892._


Pictures in an endless variety, of sand-banks, fields and their crops, and
villages, glide into view on either hand--of clouds floating in the sky,
of colours blossoming when day meets night. Boats steal by, fishermen
catch fish; the waters make liquid, caressing sounds throughout the
livelong day; their broad expanse calms down in the evening stillness,
like a child lulled to sleep, over whom all the stars in the boundless sky
keep watch--then, as I sit up on wakeful nights, with sleeping banks on
either side, the silence is broken only by an occasional cry of a jackal
in the woods near some village, or by fragments undermined by the keen
current of the Padma, that tumble from the high cliff-like bank into the
water.

Not that the prospect is always of particular interest--a yellowish
sandbank, innocent of grass or tree, stretches away; an empty boat is tied
to its edge; the bluish water, of the same shade as the hazy sky, flows
past; yet I cannot tell how it moves me. I suspect that the old desires
and longings of my servant-ridden childhood--when in the solitary
imprisonment of my room I pored over the _Arabian Nights_, and shared
with Sinbad the Sailor his adventures in many a strange land--are not yet
dead within me, but are roused at the sight of any empty boat tied to a
sand-bank.

If I had not heard fairy tales and read the _Arabian Nights_ and
_Robinson Crusoe_ in childhood, I am sure views of distant banks, or
the farther side of wide fields, would not have stirred me so--the whole
world, in fact, would have had for me a different appeal.

What a maze of fancy and fact becomes tangled up within the mind of man!
The different strands--petty and great--of story and event and picture,
how they get knotted together!




SHELIDAH,

_22nd June 1892._


Early this morning, while still lying in bed, I heard the women at the
bathing-place sending forth joyous peals of _Ulu! Ulu!_[1] The sound
moved me curiously, though it is difficult to say why.

[Footnote 1: A peculiar shrill cheer given by women on auspicious or
festive occasions.]

Perhaps such joyful outbursts put one in mind of the great stream of
festive activity which goes on in this world, with most of which the
individual man has no connection. The world is so immense, the concourse
of men so vast, yet with how few has one any tie! Distant sounds of life,
wafted near, bearing tidings from unknown homes, make the individual
realise that the greater part of the world of men does not, cannot own or
know him; then he feels deserted, loosely attached to the world, and a
vague sadness creeps over him.

Thus these cries of _Ulu! Ulu!_ made my life, past and future, seem
like a long, long road, from the very ends of which they come to me. And
this feeling colours for me the beginning of my day.

As soon as the manager with his staff, and the ryots seeking audience,
come upon the scene, this faint vista of past and future will be promptly
elbowed out, and a very robust present will salute and stand before me.




SHAZADPUR,

_25th June 1892._


In to-day's letters there was a touch about A---'s singing which made my
heart yearn with a nameless longing. Each of the little joys of life,
which remain unappreciated amid the hubbub of the town, send in their
claims to the heart when far from home. I love music, and there is no
dearth of voices and instruments in Calcutta, yet I turn a deaf ear to
them. But, though I may fail to realise it at the time, this needs must
leave the heart athirst.

As I read to-day's letters, I felt such a poignant desire to hear A---'s
sweet song, I was at once sure that one of the many suppressed longings of
creation which cry after fulfilment is for neglected joys within reach;
while we are busy pursuing chimerical impossibilities we famish our
lives....

The emptiness left by easy joys, untasted, is ever growing in my life. And
the day may come when I shall feel that, could I but have the past back, I
would strive no more after the unattainable, but drain to the full these
little, unsought, everyday joys which life offers.




SHAZADPUR,

_27th June 1892._


Yesterday, in the afternoon, it clouded over so threateningly, I felt a
sense of dread. I do not remember ever to have seen before such
angry-looking clouds.

Swollen masses of the deepest indigo blue were piled, one on top of the
other, just above the horizon, looking like the puffed-out moustaches of
some raging demon.

Under the jagged lower edges of the clouds there shone forth a blood-red
glare, as through the eyes of a monstrous, sky-filling bison, with tossing
mane and with head lowered to strike the earth in fury.

The crops in the fields and the leaves of the trees trembled with fear of
the impending disaster; shudder after shudder ran across the waters; the
crows flew wildly about, distractedly cawing.




SHAZADPUR,

_29th June 1892._


I wrote yesterday that I had an engagement with Kalidas, the poet, for
this evening. As I lit a candle, drew my chair up to the table, and made
ready, not Kalidas, but the postmaster, walked in. A live postmaster
cannot but claim precedence over a dead poet, so I could not very well
tell him to make way for Kalidas, who was due by appointment,--he would
not have understood me! Therefore I offered him a chair and gave old
Kalidas the go-by.

There is a kind of bond between this postmaster and me. When the post
office was in a part of this estate building, I used to meet him every
day. I wrote my story of "The Postmaster" one afternoon in this very room.
And when the story was out in the _Hitabadi_ he came to me with a
succession of bashful smiles, as he deprecatingly touched on the subject.
Anyhow, I like the man. He has a fund of anecdote which I enjoy listening
to. He has also a sense of humour.

Though it was late when the postmaster left, I started at once on the
_Raghuvansa_[1], and read all about the _swayamuara_[2] of
Indumati.

[Footnote 1: Book of poems by Kalidas, who is perhaps best known to
European readers as the author of _Sakuntala_.]

[Footnote 2: An old Indian custom, according to which a princess chooses
among assembled rival suitors for her hand by placing a garland round the
neck of the one whose love she returns.]

The handsome, gaily adorned princes are seated on rows of thrones in the
assembly hall. Suddenly a blast of conch-shell and trumpet resounds, as
Indumati, in bridal robes, supported by Sunanda, is ushered in and stands
in the walk left between them. It was delightful to dwell on the picture.

Then as Sunanda introduces to her each one of the suitors, Indumati bows
low in loveless salutation, and passes on. How beautiful is this humble
courtesy! They are all princes. They are all her seniors. For she is a
mere girl. Had she not atoned for the inevitable rudeness of her rejection
by the grace of her humility, the scene would have lost its beauty.




SHELIDAH,

_20th August 1892._


"If only I could live there!" is often thought when looking at a beautiful
landscape painting. That is the kind of longing which is satisfied here,
where one feels alive in a brilliantly coloured picture, with none of the
hardness of reality. When I was a child, illustrations of woodland and
sea, in _Paul and Virginia_, or _Robinson Crusoe_, would waft me
away from the everyday world; and the sunshine here brings back to my mind
the feeling with which I used to gaze on those pictures.

I cannot account for this exactly, or explain definitely what kind of
longing it is which is roused within me. It seems like the throb of some
current flowing through the artery connecting me with the larger world. I
feel as if dim, distant memories come to me of the time when I was one
with the rest of the earth; when on me grew the green grass, and on me
fell the autumn light; when a warm scent of youth would rise from every
pore of my vast, soft, green body at the touch of the rays of the mellow
sun, and a fresh life, a sweet joy, would be half-consciously secreted and
inarticulately poured forth from all the immensity of my being, as it lay
dumbly stretched, with its varied countries and seas and mountains, under
the bright blue sky.

My feelings seem to be those of our ancient earth in the daily ecstasy of
its sun-kissed life; my own consciousness seems to stream through each
blade of grass, each sucking root, to rise with the sap through the trees,
to break out with joyous thrills in the waving fields of corn, in the
rustling palm leaves.

I feel impelled to give expression to my blood-tie with the earth, my
kinsman's love for her; but I am afraid I shall not be understood.




BOALIA,

_18th November 1892._


I am wondering where your train has got to by now. This is the time for
the sun to rise over the ups and downs of the treeless, rocky region near
Nawadih station. The scene around there must be brightened by the fresh
sunlight, through which distant, blue hills are beginning to be faintly
visible.

Cultivated fields are scarcely to be seen, except where the primitive
tribesmen have done a little ploughing with their buffaloes; on each side
of the railway cutting there are the heaped-up black rocks--the
boulder-marked footprints of dried-up streams--and the fidgety, black
wagtails, perched along the telegraph wires. A wild, seamed, and scarred
nature lies there in the sun, as though tamed at the touch of some soft,
bright, cherubic hand.

Do you know the picture which this calls up for me? In the _Sakuntala_ of
Kalidas there is a scene where Bharat, the infant son of King Dushyanta,
is playing with a lion cub. The child is lovingly passing his delicate,
rosy fingers through the rough mane of the great beast, which lies quietly
stretched in trustful repose, now and then casting affectionate glances
out of the corner of its eyes at its little human friend.

And shall I tell you what those dry, boulder-strewn watercourses put me in
mind of? We read in the English fairy tale of the Babes in the Wood, how
the little brother and sister left a trace of their wanderings, through
the unknown forest into which their stepmother had turned them out, by
dropping pebbles as they went. These streamlets are like lost babes in the
great world into which they are sent adrift, and that is why they leave
stones, as they go forth, to mark their course, so as not to lose their
way when they may be returning. But for them there is no return journey!




NATORE,

_2nd December_ 1892.


There is a depth of feeling and breadth of peace in a Bengal sunset behind
the trees which fringe the endless solitary fields, spreading away to the
horizon.

Lovingly, yet sadly withal, does our evening sky bend over and meet the
earth in the distance. It casts a mournful light on the earth it leaves
behind--a light which gives us a taste of the divine grief of the Eternal
Separation[1] and eloquent is the silence which then broods over earth,
sky, and waters.

[Footnote 1: _I.e._ between Purusha and Prakriti--God and Creation.]

As I gaze on in rapt motionlessness, I fall to wondering--If ever this
silence should fail to contain itself, if the expression for which this
hour has been seeking from the beginning of time should break forth, would
a profoundly solemn, poignantly moving music rise from earth to starland?

With a little steadfast concentration of effort we can, for ourselves,
translate the grand harmony of light and colour which permeates the
universe into music. We have only to close our eyes and receive with the
ear of the mind the vibration of this ever-flowing panorama.

But how often shall I write of these sunsets and sunrises? I feel their
renewed freshness every time; yet how am I to attain such renewed
freshness in my attempts at expression?




SHELIDAH,

_9th December_ 1892.


I am feeling weak and relaxed after my painful illness, and in this state
the ministrations of nature are sweet indeed. I feel as if, like the rest,
I too am lazily glittering out my delight at the rays of the sun, and my
letter-writing progresses but absent-mindedly.

The world is ever new to me; like an old friend loved through this and
former lives, the acquaintance between us is both long and deep.

I can well realise how, in ages past, when the earth in her first youth
came forth from her sea-bath and saluted the sun in prayer, I must have
been one of the trees sprung from her new-formed soil, spreading my
foliage in all the freshness of a primal impulse.

The great sea was rocking and swaying and smothering, like a foolishly
fond mother, its first-born land with repeated caresses; while I was
drinking in the sunlight with the whole of my being, quivering under the
blue sky with the unreasoning rapture of the new-born, holding fast and
sucking away at my mother earth with all my roots. In blind joy my leaves
burst forth and my flowers bloomed; and when the dark clouds gathered,
their grateful shade would comfort me with a tender touch.

From age to age, thereafter, have I been diversely reborn on this earth.
So whenever we now sit face to face, alone together, various ancient
memories, gradually, one after another, come back to me.

My mother earth sits to-day in the cornfields by the river-side, in her
raiment of sunlit gold; and near her feet, her knees, her lap, I roll
about and play. Mother of a multitude of children, she attends but
absently to their constant calls on her, with an immense patience, but
also with a certain aloofness. She is seated there, with her far-away look
fastened on the verge of the afternoon sky, while I keep chattering on
untiringly.




BALJA,

_Tuesday, February 1893_.


I do not want to wander about any more. I am pining for a corner in which
to nestle down snugly, away from the crowd.

India has two aspects--in one she is a householder, in the other a
wandering ascetic. The former refuses to budge from the home corner, the
latter has no home at all. I find both these within me. I want to roam
about and see all the wide world, yet I also yearn for a little sheltered
nook; like a bird with its tiny nest for a dwelling, and the vast sky for
flight.

I hanker after a corner because it serves to bring calmness to my mind. My
mind really wants to be busy, but in making the attempt it knocks so
repeatedly against the crowd as to become utterly frenzied and to keep
buffeting me, its cage, from within. If only it is allowed a little
leisurely solitude, and can look about and think to its heart's content,
it will express its feelings to its own satisfaction.

This freedom of solitude is what my mind is fretting for; it would be
alone with its imaginings, as the Creator broods over His own creation.




CUTTACK,

_February 1893_.


Till we can achieve something, let us live incognito, say I. So long as we
are only fit to be looked down upon, on what shall we base our claim to
respect? When we have acquired a foothold of our own in the world, when we
have had some share in shaping its course, then we can meet others
smilingly. Till then let us keep in the background, attending to our own
affairs.

But our countrymen seem to hold the opposite opinion. They set no store by
our more modest, intimate wants which have to be met behind the
scenes,--the whole of their attention is directed to momentary
attitudinising and display.

Ours is truly a God-forsaken country. Difficult, indeed, is it for us to
maintain the strength of will to _do_. We get no help in any real
sense. There is no one, within miles of us, in converse with whom we might
gain an accession of vitality. No one near seems to be thinking, or
feeling, or working. Not a soul has any experience of big striving, or of
really and truly living. They all eat and drink, do their office work,
smoke and sleep, and chatter nonsensically. When they touch upon emotion
they grow sentimental, when they reason they are childish. One yearns for
a full-blooded, sturdy, and capable personality; these are all so many
shadows, flitting about, out of touch with the world.




CUTTACK,

_10th February_ 1893.


He was a fully developed John Bull of the outrageous type--with a huge
beak of a nose, cunning eyes, and a yard-long chin. The curtailment of our
right to be tried by jury is now under consideration by the Government.
The fellow dragged in the subject by the ears and insisted on arguing it
out with our host, poor B---- Babu. He said the moral standard of the
people of this country was low; that they had no real belief in the
sacredness of life; so that they were unfit to serve on juries.

The utter contempt with which we are regarded by these people was brought
home to me when I saw how they can accept a Bengali's hospitality and talk
thus, seated at his table, without a quiver of compunction.

As I sat in a corner of the drawing-room after dinner, everything round me
looked blurred to my eyes. I seemed to be seated by the head of my great,
insulted Motherland, who lay there in the dust before me, disconsolate,
shorn of her glory. I cannot tell what a profound distress overpowered my
heart.

How incongruous seemed the _mem-sahibs_ there, in their
evening-dresses, the hum of English conversation, and the ripples of
laughter! How richly true for us is our India of the ages; how cheap and
false the hollow courtesies of an English dinner-party!




CUTTACK,

_March_ 1893.


If we begin to attach too much importance to the applause of Englishmen,
we shall have to be rid of much in us that is good, and to accept from
them much that is bad.

We shall grow ashamed of going about without socks, and cease to feel
shame at the sight of their ball dresses. We shall have no compunction in
throwing overboard our ancient manners, nor any in emulating their lack of
courtesy.

We shall leave off wearing our _achgans_ because they are susceptible of
improvement, but think nothing of surrendering our heads to their hats,
though no headgear could well be uglier.

In short, consciously or unconsciously, we shall have to cut our lives
down according as they clap their hands or not.

Wherefore I apostrophise myself and say: "O Earthen Pot! For goodness sake
keep away from that Metal Pot! Whether he comes to you in anger or merely
to give you a patronising pat on the back, you are done for, cracked in
either case. So pay heed to old Aesop's sage counsel, I pray--and keep
your distance."

Let the metal pot ornament wealthy homes; you have work to do in those of
the poor. If you let yourself be broken, you will have no place in either,
but merely return to the dust; or, at best, you may secure a corner in a
bric-a-brac cabinet--as a curiosity, and it is more glorious far to be
used for fetching water by the meanest of village women.




SHELIDAH,

_8th May 1893_.


Poetry is a very old love of mine--I must have been engaged to her when I
was only Rathi's[1] age. Long ago the recesses under the old banyan tree
beside our tank, the inner gardens, the unknown regions on the ground
floor of the house, the whole of the outside world, the nursery rhymes and
tales told by the maids, created a wonderful fairyland within me. It is
difficult to give a clear idea of all the vague and mysterious happenings
of that period, but this much is certain, that my exchange of garlands[2]
with Poetic Fancy was already duly celebrated.

[Footnote 1: Rathi, his son, was then five years old.]

[Footnote 2: The betrothal ceremony.]

I must admit, however, that my betrothed is not an auspicious
maiden--whatever else she may bring one, it is not good fortune. I cannot
say she has never given me happiness, but peace of mind with her is out of
the question. The lover whom she favours may get his fill of bliss, but
his heart's blood is wrung out under her relentless embrace. It is not for
the unfortunate creature of her choice ever to become a staid and sober
householder, comfortably settled down on a social foundation.

Consciously or unconsciously, I may have done many things that were
untrue, but I have never uttered anything false in my poetry--that is the
sanctuary where the deepest truths of my life find refuge.




SHELIDAH,

_10th May_ 1893.


Here come black, swollen masses of cloud; they soak up the golden sunshine
from the scene in front of me like great pads of blotting-paper. Rain must
be near, for the breeze feels moist and tearful.

Over there, on the sky-piercing peaks of Simla, you will find it hard to
realise exactly what an important event the coming of the clouds is here,
or how many are anxiously looking up to the sky, hailing their advent.

I feel a great tenderness for these peasant folk--our ryots--big,
helpless, infantile children of Providence, who must have food brought to
their very lips, or they are undone. When the breasts of Mother Earth dry
up they are at a loss what to do, and can only cry. But no sooner is their
hunger satisfied than they forget all their past sufferings.

I know not whether the socialistic ideal of a more equal distribution of
wealth is attainable, but if not, the dispensation of Providence is indeed
cruel, and man a truly unfortunate creature. For if in this world misery
must exist, so be it; but let some little loophole, some glimpse of
possibility at least, be left, which may serve to urge the nobler portion
of humanity to hope and struggle unceasingly for its alleviation.

They say a terribly hard thing who assert that the division of the world's
production to afford each one a mouthful of food, a bit of clothing, is
only an Utopian dream. All these social problems are hard indeed! Fate has
allowed humanity such a pitifully meagre coverlet, that in pulling it over
one part of the world, another has to be left bare. In allaying our
poverty we lose our wealth, and with this wealth what a world of grace and
beauty and power is lost to us.

But the sun shines forth again, though the clouds are still banked up in
the West.




SHELIDAH,

_11th May 1893._


There is another pleasure for me here. Sometimes one or other of our
simple, devoted, old ryots comes to see me--and their worshipful homage is
so unaffected! How much greater than I are they in the beautiful
simplicity and sincerity of their reverence. What if I am unworthy of
their veneration--their feeling loses nothing of its value.

I regard these grown-up children with the same kind of affection that I
have for little children--but there is also a difference. They are more
infantile still. Little children will grow up later on, but these big
children never.

A meek and radiantly simple soul shines through their worn and wrinkled,
old bodies. Little children are merely simple, they have not the
unquestioning, unwavering devotion of these. If there be any undercurrent
along which the souls of men may have communication with one another, then
my sincere blessing will surely reach and serve them.




SHELIDAH,

_16th May_ 1893.


I walk about for an hour on the river bank, fresh and clean after my
afternoon bath. Then I get into the new jolly-boat, anchor in mid-stream,
and on a bed, spread on the planked over-stern, I lie silently there on my
back, in the darkness of the evening. Little S---- sits beside me and
chatters away, and the sky becomes more and more thickly studded with
stars.

Each day the thought recurs to me: Shall I be reborn under this
star-spangled sky? Will the peaceful rapture of such wonderful evenings
ever again be mine, on this silent Bengal river, in so secluded a corner
of the world?

Perhaps not. The scene may be changed; I may be born with a different
mind. Many such evenings may come, but they may refuse to nestle so
trustfully, so lovingly, with such complete abandon, to my breast.

Curiously enough, my greatest fear is lest I should be reborn in Europe!
For there one cannot recline like this with one's whole being laid open to
the infinite above--one is liable, I am afraid, to be soundly rated for
lying down at all. I should probably have been hustling strenuously in
some factory or bank, or Parliament. Like the roads there, one's mind has
to be stone-metalled for heavy traffic--geometrically laid out, and kept
clear and regulated.

I am sure I cannot exactly say why this lazy, dreamy, self-absorbed,
sky-filled state of mind seems to me the more desirable. I feel no whit
inferior to the busiest men of the world as I lie here in my jolly-boat.
Rather, had I girded up my loins to be strenuous, I might have seemed ever
so feeble compared to those chips of old oaken blocks.




SHELIDAH,

_3rd July 1893._

All last night the wind howled like a stray dog, and the rain still pours
on without a break. The water from the fields is rushing in numberless,
purling streams to the river. The dripping ryots are crossing the river in
the ferryboat, some with their tokas[1] on, others with yam leaves held
over their heads. Big cargo-boats are gliding along, the boatman sitting
drenched at his helm, the crew straining at the tow-ropes through the
rain. The birds remain gloomily confined to their nests, but the sons of
men fare forth, for in spite of the weather the world's work must go on.

[Footnote 1: Conical hats of straw or of split bamboo.]

Two cowherd lads are grazing their cattle just in front of my boat. The
cows are munching away with great gusto, their noses plunged into the lush
grass, their tails incessantly busy flicking off the flies. The raindrops
and the sticks of the cowherd boys fall on their backs with the same
unreasonable persistency, and they bear both with equally uncritical
resignation, steadily going on with their munch, munch, munch. These cows
have such mild, affectionate, mournful eyes; why, I wonder, should
Providence have thought fit to impose all the burden of man's work on the
submissive shoulders of these great, gentle beasts?

The river is rising daily. What I could see yesterday only from the upper
deck, I can now see from my cabin windows. Every morning I awake to find
my field of vision growing larger. Not long since, only the tree-tops near
those distant villages used to appear, like dark green clouds. To-day the
whole of the wood is visible.

Land and water are gradually approaching each other like two bashful
lovers. The limit of their shyness has nearly been reached--their arms
will soon be round each other's necks. I shall enjoy my trip along this
brimful river at the height of the rains. I am fidgeting to give the order
to cast off.




SHELIDAH,

_4th July_ 1893.


A little gleam of sunlight shows this morning. There was a break in the
rains yesterday, but the clouds are banked up so heavily along the skirts
of the sky that there is not much hope of the break lasting. It looks as
if a heavy carpet of cloud had been rolled up to one side, and at any
moment a fussy breeze may come along and spread it over the whole place
again, covering every trace of blue sky and golden sunshine.

What a store of water must have been laid up in the sky this year. The
river has already risen over the low _chur_-lands,[1] threatening to
overwhelm all the standing crops. The wretched ryots, in despair, are
cutting and bringing away in boats sheaves of half-ripe rice. As they pass
my boat I hear them bewailing their fate. It is easy to understand how
heart-rending it must be for cultivators to have to cut down their rice on
the very eve of its ripening, the only hope left them being that some of
the ears may possibly have hardened into grain.

[Footnote 1: Old sand-banks consolidated by the deposit of a layer of
culturable soil.]

There must be some element of pity in the dispensations of Providence,
else how did we get our share of it? But it is so difficult to see where
it comes in. The lamentations of these hundreds of thousands of
unoffending creatures do not seem to get anywhere. The rain pours on as it
lists, the river still rises, and no amount of petitioning seems to have
the effect of bringing relief from any quarter. One has to seek
consolation by saying that all this is beyond the understanding of man.
And yet, it is so vitally necessary for man to understand that there are
such things as pity and justice in the world.

However, this is only sulking. Reason tells us that creation never can be
perfectly happy. So long as it is incomplete it must put up with
imperfection and sorrow. It can only be perfect when it ceases to be
creation, and is God. Do our prayers dare go so far?

The more we think over it, the oftener we come hack to the
starting-point--Why this creation at all? If we cannot make up our minds
to object to the thing itself, it is futile complaining about its
companion, sorrow.




SHAZADPUR,

_7th July_ 1893.


The flow of village life is not too rapid, neither is it stagnant. Work
and rest go together, hand in hand. The ferry crosses to and fro, the
passers-by with umbrellas up wend their way along the tow-path, women are
washing rice on the split-bamboo trays which they dip in the water, the
ryots are coming to the market with bundles of jute on their heads. Two
men are chopping away at a log of wood with regular, ringing blows. The
village carpenter is repairing an upturned dinghy under a big
_aswatha_ tree. A mongrel dog is prowling aimlessly along the canal
bank. Some cows are lying there chewing the cud, after a huge meal off the
luxuriant grass, lazily moving their ears backwards and forwards, flicking
off flies with their tails, and occasionally giving an impatient toss of
their heads when the crows perched on their backs take too much of a
liberty.

The monotonous blows of woodcutter's axe or carpenter's mallet, the
splashing of oars, the merry voices of the naked little children at play,
the plaintive tune of the ryot's song, the more dominant creaking of the
turning oil-mill, all these sounds of activity do not seem out of harmony
with murmuring leaves and singing birds, and all combine like moving
strains of some grand dream-orchestra, rendering a composition of immense
though restrained pathos.




SHAZADPUR,

_10th July 1893._


All I have to say about the discussion that is going on over "silent
poets" is that, though the strength of feeling may be the same in those
who are silent as in those who are vocal, that has nothing to do with
poetry. Poetry is not a matter of feeling, it is the creation of form.

Ideas take shape by some hidden, subtle skill at work within the poet.
This creative power is the origin of poetry. Perceptions, feelings, or
language, are only raw material. One may be gifted with feeling, a second
with language, a third with both; but he who has as well a creative
genius, alone is a poet.




PATISAR,

_13th August 1893._


Coming through these _beels_[1] to Kaligram, an idea took shape in my
mind. Not that the thought was new, but sometimes old ideas strike one
with new force.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Sometimes a stream passing through the
flat Bengal country encounters a stretch of low land and spreads out into
a sheet of water, called a _beel_, of indefinite extent, ranging from a
large pool in the dry season to a shoreless expanse during the rains.

Villages consisting of a cluster of huts, built on mounds, stand out here
and there like islands, and boats or round, earthen vessels are the only
means of getting about from village to village.

Where the waters cover cultivated tracts the rice grows through, often
from considerable depths, giving to the boats sailing over them the
curious appearance of gliding over a cornfield, so clear is the water.
Elsewhere these _beels_ have a peculiar flora and fauna of water-lilies
and irises and various water-fowl. As a result, they resemble neither a
marsh nor a lake, but have a distinct character of their own.]

The water loses its beauty when it ceases to be defined by banks and
spreads out into a monotonous vagueness. In the case of language, metre
serves for banks and gives form and beauty and character. Just as the
banks give each river a distinct personality, so does rhythm make each
poem an individual creation; prose is like the featureless, impersonal
_beel_. Again, the waters of the river have movement and progress; those
of the _beel_ engulf the country by expanse alone. So, in order to give
language power, the narrow bondage of metre becomes necessary; otherwise
it spreads and spreads, but cannot advance.

The country people call these _beels_ "dumb waters"--they have no
language, no self-expression. The river ceaselessly babbles; so the words
of the poem sing, they are not "dumb words." Thus bondage creates beauty
of form, motion, and music; bounds make not only for beauty but power.

Poetry gives itself up to the control of metre, not led by blind habit,
but because it thus finds the joy of motion. There are foolish persons who
think that metre is a species of verbal gymnastics, or legerdemain, of
which the object is to win the admiration of the crowd. That is not so.
Metre is born as all beauty is born the universe through. The current set
up within well-defined bounds gives metrical verse power to move the minds
of men as vague and indefinite prose cannot.

This idea became clear to me as I glided on from river to _beel_ and
_beel_ to river.




PATISAR,

_26th (Straven) August 1893._


For some time it has struck me that man is a rough-hewn and woman a
finished product.

There is an unbroken consistency in the manners, customs, speech, and
adornment of woman. And the reason is, that for ages Nature has assigned
to her the same definite rôle and has been adapting her to it. No
cataclysm, no political revolution, no alteration of social ideal, has yet
diverted woman from her particular functions, nor destroyed their
inter-relations. She has loved, tended, and caressed, and done nothing
else; and the exquisite skill which she has acquired in these, permeates
all her being and doing. Her disposition and action have become
inseparably one, like the flower and its scent. She has, therefore, no
doubts or hesitations.

But the character of man has still many hollows and protuberances; each of
the varied circumstances and forces which have contributed to his making
has left its mark upon him. That is why the features of one will display
an indefinite spread of forehead, of another an irresponsible prominence
of nose, of a third an unaccountable hardness about the jaws. Had man but
the benefit of continuity and uniformity of purpose, Nature must have
succeeded in elaborating a definite mould for him, enabling him to
function simply and naturally, without such strenuous effort. He would not
have so complicated a code of behaviour; and he would be less liable to
deviate from the normal when disturbed by outside influences.

Woman was cast in the mould of mother. Man has no such primal design to go
by, and that is why he has been unable to rise to an equal perfection of
beauty.




PATISAR,

_19th February 1894._


We have two elephants which come to graze on this bank of the river. They
greatly interest me. They give the ground a few taps with one foot, and
then taking hold of the grass with the end of their trunks wrench off an
enormous piece of turf, roots, soil, and all. This they go on swinging
till all the earth leaves the roots; they then put it into their mouths
and eat it up.

Sometimes the whim takes them to draw up the dust into their trunks, and
then with a snort they squirt it all over their bodies; this is their
elephantine toilet.

I love to look on these overgrown beasts, with their vast bodies, their
immense strength, their ungainly proportions, their docile harmlessness.
Their very size and clumsiness make me feel a kind of tenderness for
them--their unwieldy bulk has something infantile about it. Moreover, they
have large hearts. When they get wild they are furious, but when they calm
down they are peace itself.

The uncouthness which goes with bigness does not repel, it rather
attracts.




PATISAR,

_27th February 1894._


The sky is every now and then overcast and again clears up. Sudden little
puffs of wind make the boat lazily creak and groan in all its seams. Thus
the day wears on.

It is now past one o'clock. Steeped in this countryside noonday, with its
different sounds--the quacking of ducks, the swirl of passing boats,
bathers splashing the clothes they wash, the distant shouts from drovers
taking cattle across the ford,--it is difficult even to imagine the
chair-and-table, monotonously dismal routine-life of Calcutta.

Calcutta is as ponderously proper as a Government office. Each of its days
comes forth, like coin from a mint, clear-cut and glittering. Ah! those
dreary, deadly days, so precisely equal in weight, so decently
respectable!

Here I am quit of the demands of my circle, and do not feel like a wound
up machine. Each day is my own. And with leisure and my thoughts I walk
the fields, unfettered by bounds of space or time. The evening gradually
deepens over earth and sky and water, as with bowed head I stroll along.




PATISAR,

_22nd March 1894._


As I was sitting at the window of the boat, looking out on the river, I
saw, all of a sudden, an odd-looking bird making its way through the water
to the opposite bank, followed by a great commotion. I found it was a
domestic fowl which had managed to escape impending doom in the galley by
jumping overboard and was now trying frantically to win across. It had
almost gained the bank when the clutches of its relentless pursuers closed
on it, and it was brought back in triumph, gripped by the neck. I told the
cook I would not have any meat for dinner.

I really must give up animal food. We manage to swallow flesh only because
we do not think of the cruel and sinful thing we do. There are many crimes
which are the creation of man himself, the wrongfulness of which is put
down to their divergence from habit, custom, or tradition. But cruelty is
not of these. It is a fundamental sin, and admits of no argument or nice
distinctions. If only we do not allow our heart to grow callous, its
protest against cruelty is always clearly heard; and yet we go on
perpetrating cruelties easily, merrily, all of us--in fact, any one who
does not join in is dubbed a crank.

How artificial is our apprehension of sin! I feel that the highest
commandment is that of sympathy for all sentient beings. Love is the
foundation of all religion. The other day I read in one of the English
papers that 50,000 pounds of animal carcasses had been sent to some army
station in Africa, but the meat being found to have gone bad on arrival,
the consignment was returned and was eventually auctioned off for a few
pounds at Portsmouth. What a shocking waste of life! What callousness to
its true worth! How many living creatures are sacrificed only to grace the
dishes at a dinner-party, a large proportion of which will leave the table
untouched!

So long as we are unconscious of our cruelty we may not be to blame. But
if, after our pity is aroused, we persist in throttling our feelings
simply in order to join others in their preying upon life, we insult all
that is good in us. I have decided to try a vegetarian diet.




PATISAR,

_28th March 1894._


It is getting rather warm here, but I do not mind the heat of the sun
much. The heated wind whistles on its way, now and then pauses in a whirl,
then dances away twirling its skirt of dust and sand and dry leaves and
twigs.

This morning, however, it was quite cold--almost like a cold-weather
morning; in fact, I did not feel over-enthusiastic for my bath. It is so
difficult to account for what veritably happens in this big thing called
Nature. Some obscure cause turns up in some unknown corner, and all of a
sudden things look completely different.

The mind of man works in just the same mysterious fashion as outside
Nature--so it struck me yesterday. A wondrous alchemy is being wrought in
artery, vein, and nerve, in brain and marrow. The blood-stream rushes on,
the nerve--strings vibrate, the heart-muscle rises and falls, and the
seasons in man's being change from one to another. What kind of breezes
will blow next, when and from what quarter--of that we know nothing.

One day I am sure I shall get along splendidly; I feel strong enough to
leap over all the obstructing sorrows and trials of the world; and, as if
I had a printed programme for the rest of my life tucked safely away in my
pocket, I am at ease. The next day there is a nasty wind, sprung up from
some unknown _inferno_, the aspect of the sky is threatening, and I
begin to doubt whether I shall ever weather the storm. Merely because
something has gone wrong in some blood-vessel or nerve-fibre, all my
strength and intelligence seem to fail me.

This mystery within frightens me. It makes me diffident about talking of
what I shall or shall not do. Why was this tacked on to me--this immense
mystery which I can neither understand nor control? I know not where it
may lead me or I lead it. I cannot see what is happening, nor am I
consulted about what is going to happen, and yet I have to keep up an
appearance of mastery and pretend to be the doer....

I feel like a living pianoforte with a vast complication of machinery and
wires inside, but with no means of telling who the player is, and with
only a guess as to why the player plays at all. I can only know what is
being played, whether the mode is merry or mournful, when the notes are
sharp or flat, the tune in or out of time, the key high-pitched or low.
But do I really know even that?




PATISAR,

_30th March 1894._


Sometimes when I realise that Life's journey is long, and that the sorrows
to be encountered are many and inevitable, a supreme effort is required to
keep up my strength of mind. Some evenings, as I sit alone staring at the
flame of the lamp on the table, I vow I will live as a brave man
should--unmoved, silent, uncomplaining. The resolve puffs me up, and for
the moment I mistake myself for a very, very brave person indeed. But as
soon as the thorns on the road worry my feet, I writhe and begin to feel
serious misgivings as to the future. The path of life again seems long,
and my strength inadequate.

But this last conclusion cannot be the true one, for it is these petty
thorns which are the most difficult to bear. The household of the mind is
a thrifty one, and only so much is spent as is necessary. There is no
squandering on trifles, and its wealth of strength is saved up with
miserly strictness to meet the really big calamities. So any amount of
weeping and wailing over the lesser griefs fails to evoke a charitable
response. But when sorrow is deepest there is no stint of effort. Then the
surface crust is pierced, and consolation wells up, and all the forces of
patience and courage are banded together to do their duty. Thus great
suffering brings with it the power of great endurance.

One side of man's nature has the desire for pleasure--there is another
side which desires self-sacrifice. When the former meets with
disappointment, the latter gains strength, and on its thus finding fuller
scope a grand enthusiasm fills the soul. So while we are cowards before
petty troubles, great sorrows make us brave by rousing our truer manhood.
And in these, therefore, there is a joy.

It is not an empty paradox to say that there is joy in sorrow, just as, on
the other hand, it is true that there is a dissatisfaction in pleasure. It
is not difficult to understand why this should be so.




SHELIDAH,

_24th June 1894_.


I have been only four days here, but, having lost count of the hours, it
seems such a long while, I feel that if I were to return to Calcutta
to-day I should find much of it changed--as if I alone had been standing
still outside the current of time, unconscious of the gradually changing
position of the rest of the world.

The fact is that here, away from Calcutta, I live in my own inner world,
where the clocks do not keep ordinary time; where duration is measured
only by the intensity of the feelings; where, as the outside world does
not count the minutes, moments change into hours and hours into moments.
So it seems to me that the subdivisions of time and space are only mental
illusions. Every atom is immeasurable and every moment infinite.

There is a Persian story which I was greatly taken with when I read it as
a boy--I think I understood, even then, something of the underlying idea,
though I was a mere child. To show the illusory character of time, a
_faquir_ put some magic water into a tub and asked the King to take a
dip. The King no sooner dipped his head in than he found himself in a
strange country by the sea, where he spent a good long time going through
a variety of happenings and doings. He married, had children, his wife and
children died, he lost all his wealth, and as he writhed under his
sufferings he suddenly found himself back in the room, surrounded by his
courtiers. On his proceeding to revile the _faquir_ for his
misfortunes, they said: "But, Sire, you have only just dipped your head
in, and raised it out of the water!"

The whole of our life with its pleasures and pains is in the same way
enclosed in one moment of time. However long or intense we may feel it to
be while it lasts, as soon as we have finished our dip in the tub of the
world, we shall find how like a slight, momentary dream the whole thing
has been....




SHELIDAH,

_9th August 1894._


I saw a dead bird floating down the current to-day. The history of its
death may easily be divined. It had a nest in some mango tree at the edge
of a village. It returned home in the evening, nestling there against
soft-feathered companions, and resting a wearied little body in sleep. All
of a sudden, in the night, the mighty Padma tossed slightly in her bed,
and the earth was swept away from the roots of the mango tree. The little
creature bereft of its nest awoke just for a moment before it went to
sleep again for ever.

When I am in the presence of the awful mystery of all-destructive Nature,
the difference between myself and the other living things seems trivial.
In town, human society is to the fore and looms large; it is cruelly
callous to the happiness and misery of other creatures as compared with
its own.

In Europe, also, man is so complex and so dominant, that the animal is too
merely an animal to him. To Indians the idea of the transmigration of the
soul from animal to man, and man to animal, does not seem strange, and so
from our scriptures pity for all sentient creatures has not been banished
as a sentimental exaggeration.

When I am in close touch with Nature in the country, the Indian in me
asserts itself and I cannot remain coldly indifferent to the abounding joy
of life throbbing within the soft down-covered breast of a single tiny
bird.




SHELIDAH,

_10th August 1894._


Last night a rushing sound in the water awoke me--a sudden boisterous
disturbance of the river current--probably the onslaught of a freshet: a
thing that often happens at this season. One's feet on the planking of the
boat become aware of a variety of forces at work beneath it. Slight
tremors, little rockings, gentle heaves, and sudden jerks, all keep me in
touch with the pulse of the flowing stream.

There must have been some sudden excitement in the night, which sent the
current racing away. I rose and sat by the window. A hazy kind of light
made the turbulent river look madder than ever. The sky was spotted with
clouds. The reflection of a great big star quivered on the waters in a
long streak, like a burning gash of pain. Both banks were vague with the
dimness of slumber, and between them was this wild, sleepless unrest,
running and running regardless of consequences.

To watch a scene like this in the middle of the night makes one feel
altogether a different person, and the daylight life an illusion. Then
again, this morning, that midnight world faded away into some dreamland,
and vanished into thin air. The two are so different, yet both are true
for man.

The day-world seems to me like European Music--its concords and discords
resolving into each other in a great progression of harmony; the
night-world like Indian Music--pure, unfettered melody, grave and
poignant. What if their contrast be so striking--both move us. This
principle of opposites is at the very root of creation, which is divided
between the rule of the King and the Queen; Night and Day; the One and the
Varied; the Eternal and the Evolving.

We Indians are under the rule of Night. We are immersed in the Eternal,
the One. Our melodies are to be sung alone, to oneself; they take us out
of the everyday world into a solitude aloof. European Music is for the
multitude and takes them along, dancing, through the ups and downs of the
joys and sorrows of men.




SHELIDAH,

_13th August 1894._


Whatever I truly think, truly feel, truly realise,--its natural destiny is
to find true expression. There is some force in me which continually works
towards that end, but is not mine alone,--it permeates the universe. When
this universal force is manifested within an individual, it is beyond his
control and acts according to its own nature; and in surrendering our
lives to its power is our greatest joy. It not only gives us expression,
but also sensitiveness and love; this makes our feelings so fresh to us
every time, so full of wonder.

When my little daughter delights me, she merges into the original mystery
of joy which is the Universe; and my loving caresses are called forth like
worship. I am sure that all our love is but worship of the Great Mystery,
only we perform it unconsciously. Otherwise it is meaningless.

Like universal gravitation, which governs large and small alike in the
world of matter, this universal joy exerts its attraction throughout our
inner world, and baffles our understanding when we see it in a partial
view. The only rational explanation of why we find joy in man and nature
is given in the Upanishad:

 For of joy are born all created things.




SHELIDAH,

_19th August 1894._


The Vedanta seems to help many to free their minds from all doubt as to
the Universe and its First Cause, but my doubts remain undispelled. It is
true that the Vedanta is simpler than most other theories. The problem of
Creation and its Creator is more complex than appears at first sight; but
the Vedanta has certainly simplified it half way, by cutting the Gordian
knot and leaving out Creation altogether.

There is only Brahma, and the rest of us merely imagine that we are,--it
is wonderful how the human mind should have found room for such a thought.
It is still more wonderful to think that the idea is not so inconsistent
as it sounds, and the real difficulty is, rather, to prove that anything
does exist.

Anyhow, when as now the moon is up, and with half-closed eyes I am
stretched beneath it on the upper deck, the soft breeze cooling my
problem-vexed head, then the earth, waters, and sky around, the gentle
rippling of the river, the casual wayfarer passing along the tow-path, the
occasional dinghy gliding by, the trees across the fields, vague in the
moonlight, the sleepy village beyond, bounded by the dark shadows of its
groves,--verily seem an illusion of _Maya_; and yet they cling to and
draw the mind and heart more truly than truth itself, which is
abstraction, and it becomes impossible to realise what kind of salvation
there can be in freeing oneself from them.




SHAZADPUR,

_5th September 1894._


I realise how hungry for space I have become, and take my fill of it in
these rooms where I hold my state as sole monarch, with all doors and
windows thrown open. Here the desire and power to write are mine as they
are nowhere else. The stir of outside life comes into me in waves of
verdure, and with its light and scent and sound stimulated my fancy into
story-writing.

The afternoons have a special enchantment of their own. The glare of the
sun, the silence, the solitude, the bird cries, especially the cawings of
crows, and the delightful, restful leisure--these conspire to carry me
away altogether.

Just such noondays seem to have gone to the making of the Arabian
Nights,--in Damascus, Bokhara, or Samarkhand, with their desert roadways,
files of camels, wandering horsemen, crystal springs, welling up under the
shade of feathery date groves; their wilderness of roses, songs of
nightingales, wines of Shiraz; their narrow bazaar paths with bright
overhanging canopies, the men, in loose robes and multi-coloured turbans,
selling dates and nuts and melons; their palaces, fragrant with incense,
luxurious with kincob-covered divans and bolsters by the window-side;
their Zobedia or Amina or Sufia with gaily decorated jacket, wide
trousers, and gold-embroidered slippers, a long narghilah pipe curled up
at her feet, with gorgeously liveried eunuchs on guard,--and all the
possible and impossible tales of human deeds and desires, and the laughter
and wailing, of that distant mysterious region.




ON THE WAY TO DIGHAPATIAYA,

_20th September 1894._


Big trees are standing in the flood water, their trunks wholly submerged,
their branches and foliage bending over the waters. Boats are tied up
under shady groves of mango and bo tree, and people bathe screened behind
them. Here and there cottages stand out in the current, their inner
quadrangles under water.

As my boat rustles its way through standing crops it now and then comes
across what was a pool and is still to be distinguished by its clusters of
water-lilies, and diver-birds pursuing fish.

The water has penetrated every possible place. I have never before seen
such a complete defeat of the land. A little more and the water will be
right inside the cottages, and their occupants will have to put up
_machans_ to live on. The cows will die if they have to remain
standing like this in water up to their knees. All the snakes have been
flooded out of their holes, and they, with sundry other homeless reptiles
and insects, will have to chum with man and take refuge on the thatch of
his roof.

The vegetation rotting in the water, refuse of all kinds floating about,
naked children with shrivelled limbs and enlarged spleens splashing
everywhere, the long-suffering patient housewives exposed in their wet
clothes to wind and rain, wading through their daily tasks with tucked-up
skirts, and over all a thick pall of mosquitoes hovering in the noxious
atmosphere--the sight is hardly pleasing!

Colds and fevers and rheumatism in every home, the malaria-stricken
infants constantly crying,--nothing can save them. How is it possible for
men to live in such unlovely, unhealthy, squalid, neglected surroundings?
The fact is we are so used to bear everything, hands down,--the ravages of
Nature, the oppression of rulers, the pressure of our _shastras_ to
which we have not a word to say, while they keep eternally grinding us
down.




ON THE WAY TO BOALIA,

_22nd September 1894._


It feels strange to be reminded that only thirty-two Autumns have come and
gone in my life; for my memory seems to have receded back into the dimness
of time immemorial; and when my inner world is flooded with a light, as of
an unclouded autumn morning, I feel I am sitting at the window of some
magic palace, gazing entranced on a scene of distant reminiscence, soothed
with soft breezes laden with the faint perfume of all the Past.

Goethe on his death-bed wanted "more light." If I have any desire left at
all at such a time, it will be for "more space" as well; for I dearly love
both light and space. Many look down on Bengal as being only a flat
country, but that is just what makes me revel in its scenery all the more.
Its unobstructed sky is filled to the brim, like an amethyst cup, with the
descending twilight and peace of the evening; and the golden skirt of the
still, silent noonday spreads over the whole of it without let or
hindrance.

Where is there another such country for the eye to look on, the mind to
take in?




CALCUTTA,

_5th October 1894._


To-morrow is the Durga Festival. As I was going to S----'s yesterday, I
noticed images being made in almost every big house on the way. It struck
me that during these few days of the Poojahs, old and young alike had
become children.

When we come to think of it, all preparation for enjoyment is really a
playing with toys which are of no consequence in themselves. From outside
it may appear wasteful, but can that be called futile which raises such a
wave of feeling through and through the country? Even the driest of
worldly-wise people are moved out of their self-centred interests by the
rush of the pervading emotion.

Thus, once every year there comes a period when all minds are in a melting
mood, fit for the springing of love and affection and sympathy. The songs
of welcome and farewell to the goddess, the meeting of loved ones, the
strains of the festive pipes, the limpid sky and molten gold of autumn,
are all parts of one great paean of joy.

Pure joy is the children's joy. They have the power of using any and every
trivial thing to create their world of interest, and the ugliest doll is
made beautiful with their imagination and lives with their life. He who
can retain this faculty of enjoyment after he has grown up, is indeed the
true Idealist. For him things are not merely visible to the eye or audible
to the ear, but they are also sensible to the heart, and their narrowness
and imperfections are lost in the glad music which he himself supplies.

Every one cannot hope to be an Idealist, but a whole people approaches
nearest to this blissful state at such seasons of festivity. And then what
may ordinarily appear to be a mere toy loses its limitations and becomes
glorified with an ideal radiance.




BOLPUR,

_19th October 1894._


We know people only in dotted outline, that is to say, with gaps in our
knowledge which we have to fill in ourselves, as best we can. Thus, even
those we know well are largely made up of our imagination. Sometimes the
lines are so broken, with even the guiding dots missing, that a portion of
the picture remains darkly confused and uncertain. If, then, our best
friends are only pieces of broken outline strung on a thread of
imagination, do we really know anybody at all, or does anybody know us
except in the same disjointed fashion? But perhaps it is these very
loopholes, allowing entrance to each other's imagination, which make for
intimacy; otherwise each one, secure in his inviolate individuality, would
have been unapproachable to all but the Dweller within.

Our own self, too, we know only in bits, and with these scraps of material
we have to shape the hero of our life-story,--likewise with the help of
our imagination. Providence has, doubtless, deliberately omitted portions
so that we may assist in our own creation.




BOLPUR,

_31st October 1894._


The first of the north winds has begun to blow to-day, shiveringly. It
looks as if there had been a visitation of the tax-gatherer in the
_Amlaki_ groves,--everything beside itself, sighing, trembling,
withering. The tired impassiveness of the noonday sunshine, with its
monotonous cooing of doves in the dense shade of the mango-tops, seems to
overcast the drowsy watches of the day with a pang, as of some impending
parting.

The ticking of the clock on my table, and the pattering of the squirrels
which scamper in and out of my room, are in harmony with all other midday
sounds.

It amuses me to watch these soft, grey and black striped, furry squirrels,
with their bushy tails, their twinkling bead-like eyes, their gentle yet
busily practical demeanour. Everything eatable has to be put away in the
wire-gauze cupboard in the corner, safe from these greedy creatures. So,
sniffing with an irrepressible eagerness, they come nosing round and round
the cupboard, trying to find some hole for entrance. If any grain or crumb
has been dropped outside they are sure to find it, and, taking it between
their forepaws, nibble away with great industry, turning it over and over
to adjust it to their mouths. At the least movement of mine up go their
tails over their backs and off they run, only to stop short half-way, sit
up on their tails on the door-mat, scratching their ears with their
hind-paws, and then come back.

Thus little sounds continue all day long--gnawing teeth, scampering feet,
and the tinkling of the china on the shelves.




SHELIDAH,

_7th December 1894._


As I walk on the moonlit sands, S---- usually comes up for a business
talk.

He came last evening; and when silence fell upon me after the talk was
over, I became aware of the eternal universe standing before me in the
evening light. The trivial chatter of one person had been enough to
obscure the presence of its all-pervading manifestation.

As soon as the patter of words came to an end, the peace of the stars
descended, and filled my heart to overflowing. I found my seat in one
corner, with these assembled millions of shining orbs, in the great
mysterious conclave of Being.

I have to start out early in the evening so as to let my mind absorb the
tranquillity outside, before S---- comes along with his jarring inquiries
as to whether the milk has agreed with me, and if I have finished going
through the Annual Statement.

How curiously placed are we between the Eternal and the Ephemeral! Any
allusion to the affairs of the stomach sounds so hopelessly discordant
when the mind is dwelling on the things of the spirit,--and yet the soul
and the stomach have been living together so long. The very spot on which
the moonlight falls is my landed property, but the moonlight tells me that
my _zamindari_ is an illusion, and my _zamindari_ tells me that
this moonlight is all emptiness. And as for poor me, I remain distracted
between the two.




SHELIDAH,

_23rd February_ 1895.


I grow quite absent-minded when I try to write for the _Sadhana_
magazine.

I raise my eyes to every passing boat and keep staring at the ferry going
to and fro. And then on the bank, close to my boat, there are a herd of
buffaloes thrusting their massive snouts into the herbage, wrapping their
tongues round it to get it into their mouths, and then munching away,
blowing hard with great big gasps of contentment, and flicking the flies
off their backs with their tails.

All of a sudden a naked weakling of a human cub appears on the scene,
makes sundry noises, and pokes one of the patient beasts with a cudgel,
whereupon, throwing occasional glances at the human sprig out of a corner
of its eye, and snatching at tufts of leaves or grass here and there on
the way, the unruffled beast leisurely moves on a few paces, and that imp
of a boy seems to feel that his duty as herdsman has been done.

I fail to penetrate this mystery of the boy-cowherd's mind. Whenever a cow
or a buffalo has selected a spot to its liking and is comfortably grazing
there, I cannot divine what purpose is served by worrying it, as he
insists on doing, till it shifts somewhere else. I suppose it is man's
masterfulness glorying in triumph over the powerful creature it has tamed.
Anyhow, I love to see these buffaloes amongst the lush grass.

But this is not what I started to say. I wanted to tell you how the least
thing distracts me nowadays from my duty to the _Sadhana_. In my last
letter[1] I told you of the bumble-bees which hover round me in some
fruitless quest, to the tune of a meaningless humming, with tireless
assiduity.

[Footnote 1: Not included in this selection.]

They come every day at about nine or ten in the morning, dart up to my
table, shoot down under the desk, go bang on to the coloured glass
window-pane, and then with a circuit or two round my head are off again
with a whizz.

I could easily have thought them to be departed spirits who had left this
world unsatisfied, and so keep coming back to it again and again in the
guise of bees, paying me an inquiring visit in passing. But I think
nothing of the kind. I am sure they are real bees, otherwise known, in
Sanskrit, as honey-suckers, or on still rarer occasions as
double-proboscideans.




SHELIDAH,

_16th (Phalgun) February_ 1895.


We have to tread every single moment of the way as we go on living our
life, but when taken as a whole it is such a very small thing, two hours
uninterrupted thought can hold all of it.

After thirty years of strenuous living Shelley could only supply material
for two volumes of biography, of which, moreover, a considerable space is
taken up by Dowden's chatter. The thirty years of my life would not fill
even one volume.

What a to-do there is over this tiny bit of life! To think of the quantity
of land and trade and commerce which go to furnish its commissariat alone,
the amount of space occupied by each individual throughout the world,
though one little chair is large enough to hold the whole of him! Yet,
after all is over and done, there remains only material for two hours'
thought, some pages of writing!

What a negligible fraction of my few pages would this one lazy day of mine
occupy! But then, will not this peaceful day, on the desolate sands by the
placid river, leave nevertheless a distinct little gold mark even upon the
scroll of my eternal past and eternal future?




SHELIDAH,

_28th February_ 1895.


I have got an anonymous letter to-day which begins:

 To give up one's self at the feet of another,
 is the truest of all gifts.

The writer has never seen me, but knows me from my writings, and goes on
to say:

  However petty or distant, the Sun[1]-worshipper gets a share of the
  Sun's rays. You are the world's poet, yet to me it seems you are my own
  poet!

[Footnote 1: Rabi, the author's name, means the Sun.]

and more in the same strain.

Man is so anxious to bestow his love on some object, that he ends by
falling in love with his own Ideal. But why should we suppose the idea to
be less true than the reality? We can never know for certain the truth of
the substance underlying what we get through the senses. Why should the
doubt be greater in the case of the entity behind the ideas which are the
creation of mind?

The mother realises in her child the great Idea, which is in every child,
the ineffableness of which, however, is not revealed to any one else. Are
we to say that what draws forth the mother's very life and soul is
illusory, but what fails to draw the rest of us to the same extent is the
real truth?

Every person is worthy of an infinite wealth of love--the beauty of his
soul knows no limit.... But I am departing into generalities. What I
wanted to express is, that in one sense I have no right to accept this
offering of my admirer's heart; that is to say, for me, seen within my
everyday covering, such a person could not possibly have had these
feelings. But there is another sense in which I am worthy of all this, or
of even greater adoration.




ON THE WAY TO PABNA,

_9th July_ 1895.


I am gliding through this winding little Ichamati, this streamlet of the
rainy season. With rows of villages along its banks, its fields of jute
and sugar-cane, its reed patches, its green bathing slopes, it is like a
few lines of a poem, often repeated and as often enjoyed. One cannot
commit to memory a big river like the Padma, but this meandering little
Ichamati, the flow of whose syllables is regulated by the rhythm of the
rains, I am gradually making my very own....

It is dusk, the sky getting dark with clouds. The thunder rumbles
fitfully, and the wild casuarina clumps bend in waves to the stormy gusts
which pass through them. The depths of bamboo thickets look black as ink.
The pallid twilight glimmers over the water like the herald of some weird
event.

I am bending over my desk in the dimness, writing this letter. I want to
whisper low-toned, intimate talk, in keeping with this penumbra of the
dusk. But it is just wishes like these which baffle all effort. They
either get fulfilled of themselves, or not at all. That is why it is a
simple matter to warm up to a grim battle, but not to an easy,
inconsequent talk.




SHELIDAH,

_14th August_ 1895.


One great point about work is that for its sake the individual has to make
light of his personal joys and sorrows; indeed, so far as may be, to
ignore them. I am reminded of an incident at Shazadpur. My servant was
late one morning, and I was greatly annoyed at his delay. He came up and
stood before me with his usual _salaam_, and with a slight catch in
his voice explained that his eight-year-old daughter had died last night.
Then, with his duster, he set to tidying up my room.

When we look at the field of work, we see some at their trades, some
tilling the soil, some carrying burdens, and yet underneath, death,
sorrow, and loss are flowing, in an unseen undercurrent, every day,--their
privacy not intruded upon. If ever these should break forth beyond control
and come to the surface, then all this work would at once come to a stop.
Over the individual sorrows, flowing beneath, is a hard stone track,
across which the trains of duty, with their human load, thunder their way,
stopping for none save at appointed stations. This very cruelty of work
proves, perhaps, man's sternest consolation.




KUSHTEA,

_5th October 1895_.


The religion that only comes to us from external scriptures never becomes
our own; our only tie with it is that of habit. To gain religion within is
man's great lifelong adventure. In the extremity of suffering must it be
born; on his life-blood it must live; and then, whether or not it brings
him happiness, the man's journey shall end in the joy of fulfilment.

We rarely realise how false for us is that which we hear from other lips,
or keep repeating with our own, while all the time the temple of our Truth
is building within us, brick by brick, day after day. We fail to
understand the mystery of this eternal building when we view our joys and
sorrows apart by themselves, in the midst of fleeting time; just as a
sentence becomes unintelligible if one has to spell through every word of
it.

When once we perceive the unity of the scheme of that creation which is
going on in us, we realise our relation to the ever-unfolding universe. We
realise that we are in the process of being created in the same way as are
the glowing heavenly orbs which revolve in their courses,--our desires,
our sufferings, all finding their proper place within the whole.

We may not know exactly what is happening: we do not know exactly even
about a speck of dust. But when we feel the flow of life in us to be one
with the universal life outside, then all our pleasures and pains are seen
strung upon one long thread of joy. The facts: _I am, I move, I
grow_, are seen in all their immensity in connection with the fact that
everything else is there along with me, and not the tiniest atom can do
without me.

The relation of my soul to this beautiful autumn morning, this vast
radiance, is one of intimate kinship; and all this colour, scent, and
music is but the outward expression of our secret communion. This constant
communion, whether realised or unrealised, keeps my mind in movement; out
of this intercourse between my inner and outer worlds I gain such
religion, be it much or little, as my capacity allows: and in its light I
have to test scriptures before I can make them really my own.




SHELIDAH,

_12th December 1895._


The other evening I was reading an English book of criticisms, full of all
manner of disputations about Poetry, Art, Beauty, and so forth and so on.
As I plodded through these artificial discussions, my tired faculties
seemed to have wandered into a region of empty mirage, filled with the
presence of a mocking demon.

The night was far advanced. I closed the book with a bang and flung it on
the table. Then I blew out the lamp with the idea of turning into bed. No
sooner had I done so than, through the open windows, the moonlight burst
into the room, with a shock of surprise.

That little bit of a lamp had been sneering drily at me, like some
Mephistopheles: and that tiniest sneer had screened off this infinite
light of joy issuing forth from the deep love which is in all the world.
What, forsooth, had I been looking for in the empty wordiness of the book?
There was the very thing itself, filling the skies, silently waiting for
me outside, all these hours!

If I had gone off to bed leaving the shutters closed, and thus missed this
vision, it would have stayed there all the same without any protest
against the mocking lamp inside. Even if I had remained blind to it all my
life,--letting the lamp triumph to the end,--till for the last time I went
darkling to bed,--even then the moon would have still been there, sweetly
smiling, unperturbed and unobtrusive, waiting for me as she has throughout
the ages.







End of Project Gutenberg's Glimpses of Bengal, by Sir Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GLIMPSES OF BENGAL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Hungry Stones, and Other Stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Hungry Stones, and Other Stories

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: February 1, 2001 [eBook #2518]
                Most recently updated: December 22, 2008

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Alev Akman, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNGRY STONES, AND OTHER STORIES ***




Produced by Alev Akman





THE HUNGRY STONES AND OTHER STORIES

By Rabindranath Tagore




Contents:

     The Hungry Stones
     The Victory
     Once There Was A King
     The Home-coming
     My Lord, The Baby
     The Kingdom Of Cards
     The Devotee
     Vision
     The Babus Of Nayanjore
     Living Or Dead?
     "We Crown Thee King"
     The Renunciation
     The Cabuliwallah [The Fruitseller from Cabul]




Preface:

The stories contained in this volume were translated by several hands.
The version of The Victory is the author's own work. The seven stories
which follow were translated by Mr. C. F. Andrews, with the help of
the author's help. Assistance has also been given by the Rev. E.
J. Thompson, Panna Lal Basu, Prabhat Kumar Mukerjii, and the Sister
Nivedita.




THE HUNGRY STONES


My kinsman and myself were returning to Calcutta from our Puja trip when
we met the man in a train. From his dress and bearing we took him at
first for an up-country Mahomedan, but we were puzzled as we heard him
talk. He discoursed upon all subjects so confidently that you might
think the Disposer of All Things consulted him at all times in all that
He did. Hitherto we had been perfectly happy, as we did not know
that secret and unheard-of forces were at work, that the Russians had
advanced close to us, that the English had deep and secret policies,
that confusion among the native chiefs had come to a head. But our
newly-acquired friend said with a sly smile: "There happen more things
in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are reported in your newspapers." As
we had never stirred out of our homes before, the demeanour of the man
struck us dumb with wonder. Be the topic ever so trivial, he would quote
science, or comment on the Vedas, or repeat quatrains from some Persian
poet; and as we had no pretence to a knowledge of science or the Vedas
or Persian, our admiration for him went on increasing, and my kinsman,
a theosophist, was firmly convinced that our fellow-passenger must
have been supernaturally inspired by some strange "magnetism" or "occult
power," by an "astral body" or something of that kind. He listened
to the tritest saying that fell from the lips of our extraordinary
companion with devotional rapture, and secretly took down notes of his
conversation. I fancy that the extraordinary man saw this, and was a
little pleased with it.

When the train reached the junction, we assembled in the waiting room
for the connection. It was then 10 P.M., and as the train, we heard, was
likely to be very late, owing to something wrong in the lines, I spread
my bed on the table and was about to lie down for a comfortable doze,
when the extraordinary person deliberately set about spinning the
following yarn. Of course, I could get no sleep that night.

When, owing to a disagreement about some questions of administrative
policy, I threw up my post at Junagarh, and entered the service of
the Nizam of Hydria, they appointed me at once, as a strong young man,
collector of cotton duties at Barich.

Barich is a lovely place. The Susta "chatters over stony ways and
babbles on the pebbles," tripping, like a skilful dancing girl, in
through the woods below the lonely hills. A flight of 150 steps rises
from the river, and above that flight, on the river's brim and at the
foot of the hills, there stands a solitary marble palace. Around it
there is no habitation of man--the village and the cotton mart of Barich
being far off.

About 250 years ago the Emperor Mahmud Shah II. had built this lonely
palace for his pleasure and luxury. In his days jets of rose-water
spurted from its fountains, and on the cold marble floors of its
spray-cooled rooms young Persian damsels would sit, their hair
dishevelled before bathing, and, splashing their soft naked feet in the
clear water of the reservoirs, would sing, to the tune of the guitar,
the ghazals of their vineyards.

The fountains play no longer; the songs have ceased; no longer do
snow-white feet step gracefully on the snowy marble. It is but the vast
and solitary quarters of cess-collectors like us, men oppressed with
solitude and deprived of the society of women. Now, Karim Khan, the old
clerk of my office, warned me repeatedly not to take up my abode there.
"Pass the day there, if you like," said he, "but never stay the night."
I passed it off with a light laugh. The servants said that they would
work till dark and go away at night. I gave my ready assent. The house
had such a bad name that even thieves would not venture near it after
dark.

At first the solitude of the deserted palace weighed upon me like a
nightmare. I would stay out, and work hard as long as possible, then
return home at night jaded and tired, go to bed and fall asleep.

Before a week had passed, the place began to exert a weird fascination
upon me. It is difficult to describe or to induce people to believe;
but I felt as if the whole house was like a living organism slowly and
imperceptibly digesting me by the action of some stupefying gastric
juice.

Perhaps the process had begun as soon as I set my foot in the house, but
I distinctly remember the day on which I first was conscious of it.

It was the beginning of summer, and the market being dull I had no work
to do. A little before sunset I was sitting in an arm-chair near the
water's edge below the steps. The Susta had shrunk and sunk low; a broad
patch of sand on the other side glowed with the hues of evening; on
this side the pebbles at the bottom of the clear shallow waters were
glistening. There was not a breath of wind anywhere, and the still air
was laden with an oppressive scent from the spicy shrubs growing on the
hills close by.

As the sun sank behind the hill-tops a long dark curtain fell upon the
stage of day, and the intervening hills cut short the time in which
light and shade mingle at sunset. I thought of going out for a ride,
and was about to get up when I heard a footfall on the steps behind. I
looked back, but there was no one.

As I sat down again, thinking it to be an illusion, I heard many
footfalls, as if a large number of persons were rushing down the steps.
A strange thrill of delight, slightly tinged with fear, passed through
my frame, and though there was not a figure before my eyes, methought I
saw a bevy of joyous maidens coming down the steps to bathe in the Susta
in that summer evening. Not a sound was in the valley, in the river, or
in the palace, to break the silence, but I distinctly heard the maidens'
gay and mirthful laugh, like the gurgle of a spring gushing forth in a
hundred cascades, as they ran past me, in quick playful pursuit of
each other, towards the river, without noticing me at all. As they were
invisible to me, so I was, as it were, invisible to them. The river was
perfectly calm, but I felt that its still, shallow, and clear waters
were stirred suddenly by the splash of many an arm jingling with
bracelets, that the girls laughed and dashed and spattered water at one
another, that the feet of the fair swimmers tossed the tiny waves up in
showers of pearl.

I felt a thrill at my heart--I cannot say whether the excitement was due
to fear or delight or curiosity. I had a strong desire to see them more
clearly, but naught was visible before me; I thought I could catch all
that they said if I only strained my ears; but however hard I strained
them, I heard nothing but the chirping of the cicadas in the woods. It
seemed as if a dark curtain of 250 years was hanging before me, and I
would fain lift a corner of it tremblingly and peer through, though the
assembly on the other side was completely enveloped in darkness.

The oppressive closeness of the evening was broken by a sudden gust of
wind, and the still surface of the Suista rippled and curled like the
hair of a nymph, and from the woods wrapt in the evening gloom there
came forth a simultaneous murmur, as though they were awakening from
a black dream. Call it reality or dream, the momentary glimpse of that
invisible mirage reflected from a far-off world, 250 years old, vanished
in a flash. The mystic forms that brushed past me with their quick
unbodied steps, and loud, voiceless laughter, and threw themselves into
the river, did not go back wringing their dripping robes as they went.
Like fragrance wafted away by the wind they were dispersed by a single
breath of the spring.

Then I was filled with a lively fear that it was the Muse that had taken
advantage of my solitude and possessed me--the witch had evidently come
to ruin a poor devil like myself making a living by collecting cotton
duties. I decided to have a good dinner--it is the empty stomach that
all sorts of incurable diseases find an easy prey. I sent for my cook
and gave orders for a rich, sumptuous moghlai dinner, redolent of spices
and ghi.

Next morning the whole affair appeared a queer fantasy. With a light
heart I put on a sola hat like the sahebs, and drove out to my work. I
was to have written my quarterly report that day, and expected to return
late; but before it was dark I was strangely drawn to my house--by what
I could not say--I felt they were all waiting, and that I should delay
no longer. Leaving my report unfinished I rose, put on my sola hat, and
startling the dark, shady, desolate path with the rattle of my carriage,
I reached the vast silent palace standing on the gloomy skirts of the
hills.

On the first floor the stairs led to a very spacious hall, its roof
stretching wide over ornamental arches resting on three rows of massive
pillars, and groaning day and night under the weight of its own intense
solitude. The day had just closed, and the lamps had not yet been
lighted. As I pushed the door open a great bustle seemed to follow
within, as if a throng of people had broken up in confusion, and rushed
out through the doors and windows and corridors and verandas and rooms,
to make its hurried escape.

As I saw no one I stood bewildered, my hair on end in a kind of ecstatic
delight, and a faint scent of attar and unguents almost effected by age
lingered in my nostrils. Standing in the darkness of that vast desolate
hall between the rows of those ancient pillars, I could hear the gurgle
of fountains plashing on the marble floor, a strange tune on the guitar,
the jingle of ornaments and the tinkle of anklets, the clang of bells
tolling the hours, the distant note of nahabat, the din of the crystal
pendants of chandeliers shaken by the breeze, the song of bulbuls from
the cages in the corridors, the cackle of storks in the gardens, all
creating round me a strange unearthly music.

Then I came under such a spell that this intangible, inaccessible,
unearthly vision appeared to be the only reality in the world--and all
else a mere dream. That I, that is to say, Srijut So-and-so, the eldest
son of So-and-so of blessed memory, should be drawing a monthly salary
of Rs. 450 by the discharge of my duties as collector of cotton duties,
and driving in my dog-cart to my office every day in a short coat and
soia hat, appeared to me to be such an astonishingly ludicrous illusion
that I burst into a horse-laugh, as I stood in the gloom of that vast
silent hall.

At that moment my servant entered with a lighted kerosene lamp in his
hand. I do not know whether he thought me mad, but it came back to me
at once that I was in very deed Srijut So-and-so, son of So-and-so of
blessed memory, and that, while our poets, great and small, alone could
say whether inside of or outside the earth there was a region where
unseen fountains perpetually played and fairy guitars, struck by
invisible fingers, sent forth an eternal harmony, this at any rate was
certain, that I collected duties at the cotton market at Banch, and
earned thereby Rs. 450 per mensem as my salary. I laughed in great glee
at my curious illusion, as I sat over the newspaper at my camp-table,
lighted by the kerosene lamp.

After I had finished my paper and eaten my moghlai dinner, I put out
the lamp, and lay down on my bed in a small side-room. Through the
open window a radiant star, high above the Avalli hills skirted by the
darkness of their woods, was gazing intently from millions and
millions of miles away in the sky at Mr. Collector lying on a humble
camp-bedstead. I wondered and felt amused at the idea, and do not knew
when I fell asleep or how long I slept; but I suddenly awoke with a
start, though I heard no sound and saw no intruder--only the steady
bright star on the hilltop had set, and the dim light of the new moon
was stealthily entering the room through the open window, as if ashamed
of its intrusion.

I saw nobody, but felt as if some one was gently pushing me. As I awoke
she said not a word, but beckoned me with her five fingers bedecked with
rings to follow her cautiously. I got up noiselessly, and, though not a
soul save myself was there in the countless apartments of that deserted
palace with its slumbering sounds and waiting echoes, I feared at every
step lest any one should wake up. Most of the rooms of the palace were
always kept closed, and I had never entered them.

I followed breathless and with silent steps my invisible guide--I
cannot now say where. What endless dark and narrow passages, what long
corridors, what silent and solemn audience-chambers and close secret
cells I crossed!

Though I could not see my fair guide, her form was not invisible to my
mind's eye,--an Arab girl, her arms, hard and smooth as marble, visible
through her loose sleeves, a thin veil falling on her face from the
fringe of her cap, and a curved dagger at her waist! Methought that one
of the thousand and one Arabian Nights had been wafted to me from the
world of romance, and that at the dead of night I was wending my way
through the dark narrow alleys of slumbering Bagdad to a trysting-place
fraught with peril.

At last my fair guide stopped abruptly before a deep blue screen, and
seemed to point to something below. There was nothing there, but a
sudden dread froze the blood in my heart-methought I saw there on the
floor at the foot of the screen a terrible negro eunuch dressed in rich
brocade, sitting and dozing with outstretched legs, with a naked sword
on his lap. My fair guide lightly tripped over his legs and held up
a fringe of the screen. I could catch a glimpse of a part of the room
spread with a Persian carpet--some one was sitting inside on a bed--I
could not see her, but only caught a glimpse of two exquisite feet
in gold-embroidered slippers, hanging out from loose saffron-coloured
paijamas and placed idly on the orange-coloured velvet carpet. On one
side there was a bluish crystal tray on which a few apples, pears,
oranges, and bunches of grapes in plenty, two small cups and a
gold-tinted decanter were evidently waiting the guest. A fragrant
intoxicating vapour, issuing from a strange sort of incense that burned
within, almost overpowered my senses.

As with trembling heart I made an attempt to step across the
outstretched legs of the eunuch, he woke up suddenly with a start, and
the sword fell from his lap with a sharp clang on the marble floor.
A terrific scream made me jump, and I saw I was sitting on that
camp-bedstead of mine sweating heavily; and the crescent moon looked
pale in the morning light like a weary sleepless patient at dawn; and
our crazy Meher Ali was crying out, as is his daily custom, "Stand back!
Stand back!!" while he went along the lonely road.

Such was the abrupt close of one of my Arabian Nights; but there were
yet a thousand nights left.

Then followed a great discord between my days and nights. During the day
I would go to my work worn and tired, cursing the bewitching night and
her empty dreams, but as night came my daily life with its bonds and
shackles of work would appear a petty, false, ludicrous vanity.

After nightfall I was caught and overwhelmed in the snare of a strange
intoxication, I would then be transformed into some unknown personage of
a bygone age, playing my part in unwritten history; and my short English
coat and tight breeches did not suit me in the least. With a red velvet
cap on my head, loose paijamas, an embroidered vest, a long flowing silk
gown, and coloured handkerchiefs scented with attar, I would complete
my elaborate toilet, sit on a high-cushioned chair, and replace my
cigarette with a many-coiled narghileh filled with rose-water, as if in
eager expectation of a strange meeting with the beloved one.

I have no power to describe the marvellous incidents that unfolded
themselves, as the gloom of the night deepened. I felt as if in the
curious apartments of that vast edifice the fragments of a beautiful
story, which I could follow for some distance, but of which I could
never see the end, flew about in a sudden gust of the vernal breeze.
And all the same I would wander from room to room in pursuit of them the
whole night long.

Amid the eddy of these dream-fragments, amid the smell of henna and
the twanging of the guitar, amid the waves of air charged with fragrant
spray, I would catch like a flash of lightning the momentary glimpse of
a fair damsel. She it was who had saffron-coloured paijamas, white ruddy
soft feet in gold-embroidered slippers with curved toes, a close-fitting
bodice wrought with gold, a red cap, from which a golden frill fell on
her snowy brow and cheeks.

She had maddened me. In pursuit of her I wandered from room to room,
from path to path among the bewildering maze of alleys in the enchanted
dreamland of the nether world of sleep.

Sometimes in the evening, while arraying myself carefully as a prince of
the blood-royal before a large mirror, with a candle burning on either
side, I would see a sudden reflection of the Persian beauty by the side
of my own. A swift turn of her neck, a quick eager glance of intense
passion and pain glowing in her large dark eyes, just a suspicion of
speech on her dainty red lips, her figure, fair and slim crowned with
youth like a blossoming creeper, quickly uplifted in her graceful
tilting gait, a dazzling flash of pain and craving and ecstasy, a smile
and a glance and a blaze of jewels and silk, and she melted away. A wild
glist of wind, laden with all the fragrance of hills and woods, would
put out my light, and I would fling aside my dress and lie down on my
bed, my eyes closed and my body thrilling with delight, and there around
me in the breeze, amid all the perfume of the woods and hills, floated
through the silent gloom many a caress and many a kiss and many a tender
touch of hands, and gentle murmurs in my ears, and fragrant breaths on
my brow; or a sweetly-perfumed kerchief was wafted again and again on
my cheeks. Then slowly a mysterious serpent would twist her stupefying
coils about me; and heaving a heavy sigh, I would lapse into
insensibility, and then into a profound slumber.

One evening I decided to go out on my horse--I do not know who implored
me to stay-but I would listen to no entreaties that day. My English hat
and coat were resting on a rack, and I was about to take them down when
a sudden whirlwind, crested with the sands of the Susta and the dead
leaves of the Avalli hills, caught them up, and whirled them round
and round, while a loud peal of merry laughter rose higher and higher,
striking all the chords of mirth till it died away in the land of
sunset.

I could not go out for my ride, and the next day I gave up my queer
English coat and hat for good.

That day again at dead of night I heard the stifled heart-breaking
sobs of some one--as if below the bed, below the floor, below the stony
foundation of that gigantic palace, from the depths of a dark damp
grave, a voice piteously cried and implored me: "Oh, rescue me! Break
through these doors of hard illusion, deathlike slumber and fruitless
dreams, place by your side on the saddle, press me to your heart, and,
riding through hills and woods and across the river, take me to the warm
radiance of your sunny rooms above!"

Who am I? Oh, how can I rescue thee? What drowning beauty, what
incarnate passion shall I drag to the shore from this wild eddy of
dreams? O lovely ethereal apparition! Where didst thou flourish and
when? By what cool spring, under the shade of what date-groves, wast
thou born--in the lap of what homeless wanderer in the desert? What
Bedouin snatched thee from thy mother's arms, an opening bud plucked
from a wild creeper, placed thee on a horse swift as lightning, crossed
the burning sands, and took thee to the slave-market of what royal city?
And there, what officer of the Badshah, seeing the glory of thy bashful
blossoming youth, paid for thee in gold, placed thee in a golden
palanquin, and offered thee as a present for the seraglio of his master?
And O, the history of that place! The music of the sareng, the jingle of
anklets, the occasional flash of daggers and the glowing wine of Shiraz
poison, and the piercing flashing glance! What infinite grandeur, what
endless servitude!

The slave-girls to thy right and left waved the chamar as diamonds
flashed from their bracelets; the Badshah, the king of kings, fell
on his knees at thy snowy feet in bejewelled shoes, and outside the
terrible Abyssinian eunuch, looking like a messenger of death, but
clothed like an angel, stood with a naked sword in his hand! Then, O,
thou flower of the desert, swept away by the blood-stained dazzling
ocean of grandeur, with its foam of jealousy, its rocks and shoals of
intrigue, on what shore of cruel death wast thou cast, or in what other
land more splendid and more cruel?

Suddenly at this moment that crazy Meher Ali screamed out: "Stand back!
Stand back!! All is false! All is false!!" I opened my eyes and saw that
it was already light. My chaprasi came and handed me my letters, and the
cook waited with a salam for my orders.

I said; "No, I can stay here no longer." That very day I packed up, and
moved to my office. Old Karim Khan smiled a little as he saw me. I felt
nettled, but said nothing, and fell to my work.

As evening approached I grew absent-minded; I felt as if I had an
appointment to keep; and the work of examining the cotton accounts
seemed wholly useless; even the Nizamat of the Nizam did not appear to
be of much worth. Whatever belonged to the present, whatever was moving
and acting and working for bread seemed trivial, meaningless, and
contemptible.

I threw my pen down, closed my ledgers, got into my dog-cart, and drove
away. I noticed that it stopped of itself at the gate of the marble
palace just at the hour of twilight. With quick steps I climbed the
stairs, and entered the room.

A heavy silence was reigning within. The dark rooms were looking sullen
as if they had taken offence. My heart was full of contrition, but
there was no one to whom I could lay it bare, or of whom I could ask
forgiveness. I wandered about the dark rooms with a vacant mind. I
wished I had a guitar to which I could sing to the unknown: "O fire,
the poor moth that made a vain effort to fly away has come back to thee!
Forgive it but this once, burn its wings and consume it in thy flame!"

Suddenly two tear-drops fell from overhead on my brow. Dark masses of
clouds overcast the top of the Avalli hills that day. The gloomy woods
and the sooty waters of the Susta were waiting in terrible suspense and
in an ominous calm. Suddenly land, water, and sky shivered, and a wild
tempest-blast rushed howling through the distant pathless woods, showing
its lightning-teeth like a raving maniac who had broken his chains.
The desolate halls of the palace banged their doors, and moaned in the
bitterness of anguish.

The servants were all in the office, and there was no one to light the
lamps. The night was cloudy and moonless. In the dense gloom within I
could distinctly feel that a woman was lying on her face on the carpet
below the bed--clasping and tearing her long dishevelled hair with
desperate fingers. Blood was tricking down her fair brow, and she was
now laughing a hard, harsh, mirthless laugh, now bursting into violent
wringing sobs, now rending her bodice and striking at her bare bosom,
as the wind roared in through the open window, and the rain poured in
torrents and soaked her through and through.

All night there was no cessation of the storm or of the passionate cry.
I wandered from room to room in the dark, with unavailing sorrow. Whom
could I console when no one was by? Whose was this intense agony of
sorrow? Whence arose this inconsolable grief?

And the mad man cried out: "Stand back! Stand back!! All is false! All
is false!!"

I saw that the day had dawned, and Meher Ali was going round and round
the palace with his usual cry in that dreadful weather. Suddenly it
came to me that perhaps he also had once lived in that house, and that,
though he had gone mad, he came there every day, and went round and
round, fascinated by the weird spell cast by the marble demon.

Despite the storm and rain I ran to him and asked: "Ho, Meher Ali, what
is false?"

The man answered nothing, but pushing me aside went round and round
with his frantic cry, like a bird flying fascinated about the jaws of a
snake, and made a desperate effort to warn himself by repeating: "Stand
back! Stand back!! All is false! All is false!!"

I ran like a mad man through the pelting rain to my office, and asked
Karim Khan: "Tell me the meaning of all this!"

What I gathered from that old man was this: That at one time countless
unrequited passions and unsatisfied longings and lurid flames of wild
blazing pleasure raged within that palace, and that the curse of all
the heart-aches and blasted hopes had made its every stone thirsty and
hungry, eager to swallow up like a famished ogress any living man who
might chance to approach. Not one of those who lived there for three
consecutive nights could escape these cruel jaws, save Meher Ali, who
had escaped at the cost of his reason.

I asked: "Is there no means whatever of my release?" The old man said:
"There is only one means, and that is very difficult. I will tell you
what it is, but first you must hear the history of a young Persian girl
who once lived in that pleasure-dome. A stranger or a more bitterly
heart-rending tragedy was never enacted on this earth."

Just at this moment the coolies announced that the train was coming.
So soon? We hurriedly packed up our luggage, as the tram steamed in. An
English gentleman, apparently just aroused from slumber, was looking out
of a first-class carriage endeavouring to read the name of the station.
As soon as he caught sight of our fellow-passenger, he cried, "Hallo,"
and took him into his own compartment. As we got into a second-class
carriage, we had no chance of finding out who the man was nor what was
the end of his story.

I said; "The man evidently took us for fools and imposed upon us out of
fun. The story is pure fabrication from start to finish." The discussion
that followed ended in a lifelong rupture between my theosophist kinsman
and myself.




THE VICTORY

She was the Princess Ajita. And the court poet of King Narayan had never
seen her. On the day he recited a new poem to the king he would raise
his voice just to that pitch which could be heard by unseen hearers in
the screened balcony high above the hall. He sent up his song towards
the star-land out of his reach, where, circled with light, the planet
who ruled his destiny shone unknown and out of ken.

He would espy some shadow moving behind the veil. A tinkling sound would
come to his car from afar, and would set him dreaming of the ankles
whose tiny golden bells sang at each step. Ah, the rosy red tender feet
that walked the dust of the earth like God's mercy on the fallen! The
poet had placed them on the altar of his heart, where he wove his songs
to the tune of those golden bells. Doubt never arose in his mind as to
whose shadow it was that moved behind the screen, and whose anklets they
were that sang to the time of his beating heart.

Manjari, the maid of the princess, passed by the poet's house on her way
to the river, and she never missed a day to have a few words with him on
the sly. When she found the road deserted, and the shadow of dusk on
the land, she would boldly enter his room, and sit at the corner of
his carpet. There was a suspicion of an added care in the choice of the
colour of her veil, in the setting of the flower in her hair.

People smiled and whispered at this, and they were not to blame. For
Shekhar the poet never took the trouble to hide the fact that these
meetings were a pure joy to him.

The meaning of her name was the spray of flowers. One must confess that
for an ordinary mortal it was sufficient in its sweetness. But Shekhar
made his own addition to this name, and called her the Spray of Spring
Flowers. And ordinary mortals shook their heads and said, Ah, me!

In the spring songs that the poet sang the praise of the spray of spring
flowers was conspicuously reiterated; and the king winked and smiled at
him when he heard it, and the poet smiled in answer.

The king would put him the question; "Is it the business of the bee
merely to hum in the court of the spring?"

The poet would answer; "No, but also to sip the honey of the spray of
spring flowers."

And they all laughed in the king's hall. And it was rumoured that the
Princess Akita also laughed at her maid's accepting the poet's name for
her, and Manjari felt glad in her heart.

Thus truth and falsehood mingle in life--and to what God builds man adds
his own decoration.

Only those were pure truths which were sung by the poet. The theme was
Krishna, the lover god, and Radha, the beloved, the Eternal Man and the
Eternal Woman, the sorrow that comes from the beginning of time, and the
joy without end. The truth of these songs was tested in his inmost heart
by everybody from the beggar to the king himself. The poet's songs were
on the lips of all. At the merest glimmer of the moon and the faintest
whisper of the summer breeze his songs would break forth in the land
from windows and courtyards, from sailing-boats, from shadows of the
wayside trees, in numberless voices.

Thus passed the days happily. The poet recited, the king listened, the
hearers applauded, Manjari passed and repassed by the poet's room on her
way to the river--the shadow flitted behind the screened balcony, and
the tiny golden bells tinkled from afar.

Just then set forth from his home in the south a poet on his path of
conquest. He came to King Narayan, in the kingdom of Amarapur. He stood
before the throne, and uttered a verse in praise of the king. He had
challenged all the court poets on his way, and his career of victory had
been unbroken.

The king received him with honour, and said: "Poet, I offer you
welcome."

Pundarik, the poet, proudly replied: "Sire, I ask for war."

Shekhar, the court poet of the king did not know how the battle of the
muse was to be waged. He had no sleep at night. The mighty figure of the
famous Pundarik, his sharp nose curved like a scimitar, and his proud
head tilted on one side, haunted the poet's vision in the dark.

With a trembling heart Shekhar entered the arena in the morning. The
theatre was filled with the crowd.

The poet greeted his rival with a smile and a bow. Pundarik returned it
with a slight toss of his head, and turned his face towards his circle
of adoring followers with a meaning smile. Shekhar cast his glance
towards the screened balcony high above, and saluted his lady in his
mind, saying! "If I am the winner at the combat to-day, my lady, thy
victorious name shall be glorified."

The trumpet sounded. The great crowd stood up, shouting victory to the
king. The king, dressed in an ample robe of white, slowly came into the
hall like a floating cloud of autumn, and sat on his throne.

Pundarik stood up, and the vast hall became still. With his head raised
high and chest expanded, he began in his thundering voice to recite the
praise of King Narayan. His words burst upon the walls of the hall
like breakers of the sea, and seemed to rattle against the ribs of the
listening crowd. The skill with which he gave varied meanings to the
name Narayan, and wove each letter of it through the web of his verses
in all mariner of combinations, took away the breath of his amazed
hearers.

For some minutes after he took his seat his voice continued to vibrate
among the numberless pillars of the king's court and in thousands of
speechless hearts. The learned professors who had come from distant
lands raised their right hands, and cried, Bravo!

The king threw a glance on Shekhar's face, and Shekhar in answer raised
for a moment his eyes full of pain towards his master, and then stood
up like a stricken deer at bay. His face was pale, his bashfulness was
almost that of a woman, his slight youthful figure, delicate in its
outline, seemed like a tensely strung vina ready to break out in music
at the least touch.

His head was bent, his voice was low, when he began. The first few
verses were almost inaudible. Then he slowly raised his head, and his
clear sweet voice rose into the sky like a quivering flame of fire. He
began with the ancient legend of the kingly line lost in the haze of
the past, and brought it down through its long course of heroism and
matchless generosity to the present age. He fixed his gaze on the king's
face, and all the vast and unexpressed love of the people for the royal
house rose like incense in his song, and enwreathed the throne on all
sides. These were his last words when, trembling, he took his seat: "My
master, I may be beaten in play of words, but not in my love for thee."

Tears filled the eyes of the hearers, and the stone walls shook with
cries of victory.

Mocking this popular outburst of feeling, with an august shake of
his head and a contemptuous sneer, Pundarik stood up, and flung this
question to the assembly; "What is there superior to words?" In a moment
the hall lapsed into silence again.

Then with a marvellous display of learning, he proved that the Word was
in the beginning, that the Word was God. He piled up quotations from
scriptures, and built a high altar for the Word to be seated above all
that there is in heaven and in earth. He repeated that question in his
mighty voice: "What is there superior to words?"

Proudly he looked around him. None dared to accept his challenge, and
he slowly took his seat like a lion who had just made a full meal of
its victim. The pandits shouted, Bravo! The king remained silent with
wonder, and the poet Shekhar felt himself of no account by the side of
this stupendous learning. The assembly broke up for that day.

Next day Shekhar began his song. It was of that day when the pipings of
love's flute startled for the first time the hushed air of the Vrinda
forest. The shepherd women did not know who was the player or whence
came the music. Sometimes it seemed to come from the heart of the south
wind, and sometimes from the straying clouds of the hilltops. It came
with a message of tryst from the land of the sunrise, and it floated
from the verge of sunset with its sigh of sorrow. The stars seemed to
be the stops of the instrument that flooded the dreams of the night
with melody. The music seemed to burst all at once from all sides,
from fields and groves, from the shady lanes and lonely roads, from the
melting blue of the sky, from the shimmering green of the grass. They
neither knew its meaning nor could they find words to give utterance
to the desire of their hearts. Tears filled their eyes, and their life
seemed to long for a death that would be its consummation.

Shekhar forgot his audience, forgot the trial of his strength with a
rival. He stood alone amid his thoughts that rustled and quivered round
him like leaves in a summer breeze, and sang the Song of the Flute. He
had in his mind the vision of an image that had taken its shape from a
shadow, and the echo of a faint tinkling sound of a distant footstep.

He took his seat. His hearers trembled with the sadness of an
indefinable delight, immense and vague, and they forgot to applaud
him. As this feeling died away Pundarik stood up before the throne
and challenged his rival to define who was this Lover and who was the
Beloved. He arrogantly looked around him, he smiled at his followers
and then put the question again: "Who is Krishna, the lover, and who is
Radha, the beloved?"

Then he began to analyse the roots of those names,--and various
interpretations of their meanings. He brought before the bewildered
audience all the intricacies of the different schools of metaphysics
with consummate skill. Each letter of those names he divided from its
fellow, and then pursued them with a relentless logic till they fell to
the dust in confusion, to be caught up again and restored to a meaning
never before imagined by the subtlest of word-mongers.

The pandits were in ecstasy; they applauded vociferously; and the crowd
followed them, deluded into the certainty that they had witnessed, that
day, the last shred of the curtains of Truth torn to pieces before their
eyes by a prodigy of intellect. The performance of his tremendous feat
so delighted them that they forgot to ask themselves if there was any
truth behind it after all.

The king's mind was overwhelmed with wonder. The atmosphere was
completely cleared of all illusion of music, and the vision of the world
around seemed to be changed from its freshness of tender green to the
solidity of a high road levelled and made hard with crushed stones.

To the people assembled their own poet appeared a mere boy in comparison
with this giant, who walked with such case, knocking down difficulties
at each step in the world of words and thoughts. It became evident
to them for the first time that the poems Shekhar wrote were absurdly
simple, and it must be a mere accident that they did not write them
themselves. They were neither new, nor difficult, nor instructive, nor
necessary.

The king tried to goad his poet with keen glances, silently inciting him
to make a final effort. But Shekhar took no notice, and remained fixed
to his seat.

The king in anger came down from his throne--took off his pearl chain
and put it on Pundarik's head. Everybody in the hall cheered. From the
upper balcony came a slight sound of the movements of rustling robes and
waist-chains hung with golden bells. Shekhar rose from his seat and left
the hall.

It was a dark night of waning moon. The poet Shekhar took down his MSS.
from his shelves and heaped them on the floor. Some of them contained
his earliest writings, which he had almost forgotten. He turned over the
pages, reading passages here and there. They all seemed to him poor and
trivial--mere words and childish rhymes!

One by one he tore his books to fragments, and threw them into a vessel
containing fire, and said: "To thee, to thee, O my beauty, my fire! Thou
hast been burning in my heart all these futile years. If my life were
a piece of gold it would come out of its trial brighter, but it is a
trodden turf of grass, and nothing remains of it but this handful of
ashes."

The night wore on. Shekhar opened wide his windows. He spread upon
his bed the white flowers that he loved, the jasmines, tuberoses and
chrysanthemums, and brought into his bedroom all the lamps he had in
his house and lighted them. Then mixing with honey the juice of some
poisonous root he drank it and lay down on his bed.

Golden anklets tinkled in the passage outside the door, and a subtle
perfume came into the room with the breeze.

The poet, with his eyes shut, said; "My lady, have you taken pity upon
your servant at last and come to see him?"

The answer came in a sweet voice "My poet, I have come."

Shekhar opened his eyes--and saw before his bed the figure of a woman.

His sight was dim and blurred. And it seemed to him that the image made
of a shadow that he had ever kept throned in the secret shrine of his
heart had come into the outer world in his last moment to gaze upon his
face.

The woman said; "I am the Princess Ajita."

The poet with a great effort sat up on his bed.

The princess whispered into his car: "The king has not done you justice.
It was you who won at the combat, my poet, and I have come to crown you
with the crown of victory."

She took the garland of flowers from her own neck, and put it on his
hair, and the poet fell down upon his bed stricken by death.




ONCE THERE WAS A KING

"Once upon a time there was a king."

When we were children there was no need to know who the king in the
fairy story was. It didn't matter whether he was called Shiladitya or
Shaliban, whether he lived at Kashi or Kanauj. The thing that made a
seven-year-old boy's heart go thump, thump with delight was this one
sovereign truth; this reality of all realities: "Once there was a king."

But the readers of this modern age are far more exact and exacting.
When they hear such an opening to a story, they are at once critical and
suspicious. They apply the searchlight of science to its legendary haze
and ask: "Which king?"

The story-tellers have become more precise in their turn. They are no
longer content with the old indefinite, "There was a king," but assume
instead a look of profound learning, and begin: "Once there was a king
named Ajatasatru,"

The modern reader's curiosity, however, is not so easily satisfied. He
blinks at the author through his scientific spectacles, and asks again:
"Which Ajatasatru?"

"Every schoolboy knows," the author proceeds, "that there were three
Ajatasatrus. The first was born in the twentieth century B.C., and died
at the tender age of two years and eight months, I deeply regret that it
is impossible to find, from any trustworthy source, a detailed account
of his reign. The second Ajatasatru is better known to historians. If
you refer to the new Encyclopedia of History...."

By this time the modern reader's suspicions are dissolved. He feels he
may safely trust his author. He says to himself: "Now we shall have a
story that is both improving and instructive."

Ah! how we all love to be deluded! We have a secret dread of being
thought ignorant. And we end by being ignorant after all, only we have
done it in a long and roundabout way.

There is an English proverb; "Ask me no questions, and I will tell you
no lies." The boy of seven who is listening to a fairy story understands
that perfectly well; he withholds his questions, while the story is
being told. So the pure and beautiful falsehood of it all remains naked
and innocent as a babe; transparent as truth itself; limpid as afresh
bubbling spring. But the ponderous and learned lie of our moderns has
to keep its true character draped and veiled. And if there is discovered
anywhere the least little peep-hole of deception, the reader turns away
with a prudish disgust, and the author is discredited.

When we were young, we understood all sweet things; and we could detect
the sweets of a fairy story by an unerring science of our own. We never
cared for such useless things as knowledge. We only cared for truth. And
our unsophisticated little hearts knew well where the Crystal Palace of
Truth lay and how to reach it. But to-day we are expected to write pages
of facts, while the truth is simply this:

"There was a king."

I remember vividly that evening in Calcutta when the fairy story began.
The rain and the storm had been incessant. The whole of the city was
flooded. The water was knee-deep in our lane. I had a straining hope,
which was almost a certainty, that my tutor would be prevented from
coming that evening. I sat on the stool in the far corner of the veranda
looking down the lane, with a heart beating faster and faster. Every
minute I kept my eye on the rain, and when it began to grow less
I prayed with all my might; "Please, God, send some more rain till
half-past seven is over." For I was quite ready to believe that there
was no other need for rain except to protect one helpless boy one
evening in one corner of Calcutta from the deadly clutches of his tutor.

If not in answer to my prayer, at any rate according to some grosser law
of physical nature, the rain did not give up.

But, alas! nor did my teacher.

Exactly to the minute, in the bend of the lane, I saw his approaching
umbrella. The great bubble of hope burst in my breast, and my heart
collapsed. Truly, if there is a punishment to fit the crime after death,
then my tutor will be born again as me, and I shall be born as my tutor.

As soon as I saw his umbrella I ran as hard as I could to my mother's
room. My mother and my grandmother were sitting opposite one another
playing cards by the light of a lamp. I ran into the room, and flung
myself on the bed beside my mother, and said:

"Mother dear, the tutor has come, and I have such a bad headache;
couldn't I have no lessons today?"

I hope no child of immature age will be allowed to read this story,
and I sincerely trust it will not be used in text-books or primers for
schools. For what I did was dreadfully bad, and I received no punishment
whatever. On the contrary, my wickedness was crowned with success.

My mother said to me: "All right," and turning to the servant added:
"Tell the tutor that he can go back home."

It was perfectly plain that she didn't think my illness very serious, as
she went on with her game as before, and took no further notice. And I
also, burying my head in the pillow, laughed to my heart's content. We
perfectly understood one another, my mother and I.

But every one must know how hard it is for a boy of seven years old to
keep up the illusion of illness for a long time. After about a minute I
got hold of Grandmother, and said: "Grannie, do tell me a story."

I had to ask this many times. Grannie and Mother went on playing cards,
and took no notice. At last Mother said to me: "Child, don't bother.
Wait till we've finished our game." But I persisted: "Grannie, do tell
me a story." I told Mother she could finish her game to-morrow, but she
must let Grannie tell me a story there and then.

At last Mother threw down the cards and said: "You had better do what
he wants. I can't manage him." Perhaps she had it in her mind that she
would have no tiresome tutor on the morrow, while I should be obliged to
be back to those stupid lessons.

As soon as ever Mother had given way, I rushed at Grannie. I got hold
of her hand, and, dancing with delight, dragged her inside my mosquito
curtain on to the bed. I clutched hold of the bolster with both hands
in my excitement, and jumped up and down with joy, and when I had got a
little quieter, said: "Now, Grannie, let' s have the story!"

Grannie went on: "And the king had a queen." That was good to begin
with. He had only one.

It is usual for kings in fairy stories to be extravagant in queens. And
whenever we hear that there are two queens, our hearts begin to sink.
One is sure to be unhappy. But in Grannie's story that danger was past.
He had only one queen.

We next hear that the king had not got any son. At the age of seven I
didn't think there was any need to bother if a man had had no son. He
might only have been in the way. Nor are we greatly excited when we hear
that the king has gone away into the forest to practise austerities in
order to get a son. There was only one thing that would have made me go
into the forest, and that was to get away from my tutor!

But the king left behind with his queen a small girl, who grew up into a
beautiful princess.

Twelve years pass away, and the king goes on practising austerities, and
never thinks all this while of his beautiful daughter. The princess has
reached the full bloom of her youth. The age of marriage has passed, but
the king does not return. And the queen pines away with grief and cries:
"Is my golden daughter destined to die unmarried? Ah me! What a fate is
mine."

Then the queen sent men to the king to entreat him earnestly to come
back for a single night and take one meal in the palace. And the king
consented.

The queen cooked with her own hand, and with the greatest care,
sixty-four dishes, and made a seat for him of sandal-wood, and arranged
the food in plates of gold and cups of silver. The princess stood behind
with the peacock-tail fan in her hand. The king, after twelve years'
absence, came into the house, and the princess waved the fan, lighting
up all the room with her beauty. The king looked in his daughter's face,
and forgot to take his food.

At last he asked his queen: "Pray, who is this girl whose beauty shines
as the gold image of the goddess? Whose daughter is she?"

The queen beat her forehead, and cried: "Ah, how evil is my fate! Do
you not know your own daughter?"

The king was struck with amazement. He said at last; "My tiny daughter
has grown to be a woman."

"What else?" the queen said with a sigh. "Do you not know that twelve
years have passed by?"

"But why did you not give her in marriage?" asked the king.

"You were away," the queen said. "And how could I find her a suitable
husband?"

The king became vehement with excitement. "The first man I see
to-morrow," he said, "when I come out of the palace shall marry her."

The princess went on waving her fan of peacock feathers, and the king
finished his meal.

The next morning, as the king came out of his palace, he saw the son of
a Brahman gathering sticks in the forest outside the palace gates. His
age was about seven or eight.

The king said: "I will marry my daughter to him."

Who can interfere with a king's command? At once the boy was called, and
the marriage garlands were exchanged between him and the princess.

At this point I came up close to my wise Grannie and asked her eagerly:
"What then?"

In the bottom of my heart there was a devout wish to substitute myself
for that fortunate wood-gatherer of seven years old. The night was
resonant with the patter of rain. The earthen lamp by my bedside was
burning low. My grandmother's voice droned on as she told the story. And
all these things served to create in a corner of my credulous heart the
belief that I had been gathering sticks in the dawn of some indefinite
time in the kingdom of some unknown king, and in a moment garlands had
been exchanged between me and the princess, beautiful as the Goddess of
Grace. She had a gold band on her hair and gold earrings in her ears.
She bad a necklace and bracelets of gold, and a golden waist-chain round
her waist, and a pair of golden anklets tinkled above her feet.

If my grandmother were an author how many explanations she would have to
offer for this little story! First of all, every one would ask why
the king remained twelve years in the forest? Secondly, why should the
king's daughter remain unmarried all that while? This would be regarded
as absurd.

Even if she could have got so far without a quarrel, still there would
have been a great hue and cry about the marriage itself. First, it never
happened. Secondly, how could there be a marriage between a princess of
the Warrior Caste and a boy of the priestly Brahman Caste? Her readers
would have imagined at once that the writer was preaching against our
social customs in an underhand way. And they would write letters to the
papers.

So I pray with all my heart that my grandmother may be born a
grandmother again, and not through some cursed fate take birth as her
luckless grandson.

So with a throb of joy and delight, I asked Grannie: "What then?"

Grannie went on: Then the princess took her little husband away in
great distress, and built a large palace with seven wings, and began to
cherish her husband with great care.

I jumped up and down in my bed and clutched at the bolster more tightly
than ever and said: "What then?"

Grannie continued: The little boy went to school and learnt many lessons
from his teachers, and as he grew up his class-fellows began to ask him:
"Who is that beautiful lady who lives with you in the palace with the
seven wings?" The Brahman's son was eager to know who she was. He could
only remember how one day he had been gathering sticks, and a great
disturbance arose. But all that was so long ago, that he had no clear
recollection.

Four or five years passed in this way. His companions always asked him:
"Who is that beautiful lady in the palace with the seven wings?" And the
Brahman's son would come back from school and sadly tell the princess:
"My school companions always ask me who is that beautiful lady in the
palace with the seven wings, and I can give them no reply. Tell me, oh,
tell me, who you are!"

The princess said: "Let it pass to-day. I will tell you some other
day." And every day the Brahman's son would ask; "Who are you?" and the
princess would reply: "Let it pass to-day. I will tell you some other
day." In this manner four or five more years passed away.

At last the Brahman's son became very impatient, and said: "If you do
not tell me to-day who you are, O beautiful lady, I will leave this
palace with the seven wings." Then the princess said: "I will certainly
tell you to-morrow."

Next day the Brahman's son, as soon as he came home from school, said:
"Now, tell me who you are." The princess said: "To-night I will tell you
after supper, when you are in bed."

The Brahman's son said: "Very well "; and he began to count the hours
in expectation of the night. And the princess, on her side, spread white
flowers over the golden bed, and lighted a gold lamp with fragrant oil,
and adorned her hair, and dressed herself in a beautiful robe of blue,
and began to count the hours in expectation of the night.

That evening when her husband, the Brahman's son, had finished his
meal, too excited almost to eat, and had gone to the golden bed in the
bed-chamber strewn with flowers, he said to himself: "To-night I shall
surely know who this beautiful lady is in the palace with the seven
wings."

The princess took for her the food that was left over by her husband,
and slowly entered the bed-chamber. She had to answer that night the
question, which was the beautiful lady who lived in the palace with
the seven wings. And as she went up to the bed to tell him she found a
serpent had crept out of the flowers and had bitten the Brahman's son.
Her boy-husband was lying on the bed of flowers, with face pale in
death.

My heart suddenly ceased to throb, and I asked with choking voice: "What
then?"

Grannie said; "Then..."

But what is the use of going on any further with the story? It would
only lead on to what was more and more impossible. The boy of seven
did not know that, if there were some "What then?" after death, no
grandmother of a grandmother could tell us all about it.

But the child's faith never admits defeat, and it would snatch at the
mantle of death itself to turn him back. It would be outrageous for him
to think that such a story of one teacherless evening could so suddenly
come to a stop. Therefore the grandmother had to call back her story
from the ever-shut chamber of the great End, but she does it so simply:
it is merely by floating the dead body on a banana stem on the river,
and having some incantations read by a magician. But in that rainy night
and in the dim light of a lamp death loses all its horror in the mind of
the boy, and seems nothing more than a deep slumber of a single night.
When the story ends the tired eyelids are weighed down with sleep. Thus
it is that we send the little body of the child floating on the back of
sleep over the still water of time, and then in the morning read a few
verses of incantation to restore him to the world of life and light.




THE HOME-COMING

Phatik Chakravorti was ringleader among the boys of the village. A new
mischief got into his head. There was a heavy log lying on the mud-flat
of the river waiting to be shaped into a mast for a boat. He decided
that they should all work together to shift the log by main force from
its place and roll it away. The owner of the log would be angry and
surprised, and they would all enjoy the fun. Every one seconded the
proposal, and it was carried unanimously.

But just as the fun was about to begin, Makhan, Phatik's younger
brother, sauntered up, and sat down on the log in front of them all
without a word. The boys were puzzled for a moment. He was pushed,
rather timidly, by one of the boys and told to get up but he remained
quite unconcerned. He appeared like a young philosopher meditating on
the futility of games. Phatik was furious. "Makhan," he cried, "if you
don't get down this minute I'll thrash you!"

Makhan only moved to a more comfortable position.

Now, if Phatik was to keep his regal dignity before the public, it was
clear he ought to carry out his threat. But his courage failed him
at the crisis. His fertile brain, however, rapidly seized upon a new
manoeuvre which would discomfit his brother and afford his followers an
added amusement. He gave the word of command to roll the log and Makhan
over together. Makhan heard the order, and made it a point of honour
to stick on. But he overlooked the fact, like those who attempt earthly
fame in other matters, that there was peril in it.

The boys began to heave at the log with all their might, calling out,
"One, two, three, go," At the word "go" the log went; and with it went
Makhan's philosophy, glory and all.

All the other boys shouted themselves hoarse with delight. But Phatik
was a little frightened. He knew what was coming. And, sure enough,
Makhan rose from Mother Earth blind as Fate and screaming like the
Furies. He rushed at Phatik and scratched his face and beat him and
kicked him, and then went crying home. The first act of the drama was
over.

Phatik wiped his face, and sat down on the edge of a sunken barge on the
river bank, and began to chew a piece of grass. A boat came up to the
landing, and a middle-aged man, with grey hair and dark moustache,
stepped on shore. He saw the boy sitting there doing nothing, and asked
him where the Chakravortis lived. Phatik went on chewing the grass,
and said: "Over there," but it was quite impossible to tell where he
pointed. The stranger asked him again. He swung his legs to and fro on
the side of the barge, and said; "Go and find out," and continued to
chew the grass as before.

But now a servant came down from the house, and told Phatik his mother
wanted him. Phatik refused to move. But the servant was the master on
this occasion. He took Phatik up roughly, and carried him, kicking and
struggling in impotent rage.

When Phatik came into the house, his mother saw him. She called out
angrily: "So you have been hitting Makhan again?"

Phatik answered indignantly: "No, I haven't; who told you that?"

His mother shouted: "Don't tell lies! You have."

Phatik said suddenly: "I tell you, I haven't. You ask Makhan!" But
Makhan thought it best to stick to his previous statement. He said:
"Yes, mother. Phatik did hit me."

Phatik's patience was already exhausted. He could not hear this
injustice. He rushed at Makban, and hammered him with blows: "Take that"
he cried, "and that, and that, for telling lies."

His mother took Makhan's side in a moment, and pulled Phatik away,
beating him with her hands. When Phatik pushed her aside, she shouted
out: "What I you little villain! would you hit your own mother?"

It was just at this critical juncture that the grey-haired stranger
arrived. He asked what was the matter. Phatik looked sheepish and
ashamed.

But when his mother stepped back and looked at the stranger, her anger
was changed to surprise. For she recognised her brother, and cried:
"Why, Dada! Where have you come from?" As she said these words, she
bowed to the ground and touched his feet. Her brother had gone away soon
after she had married, and he had started business in Bombay. His sister
had lost her husband while he was In Bombay. Bishamber had now come back
to Calcutta, and had at once made enquiries about his sister. He had
then hastened to see her as soon as he found out where she was.

The next few days were full of rejoicing. The brother asked after the
education of the two boys. He was told by his sister that Phatik was a
perpetual nuisance. He was lazy, disobedient, and wild. But Makhan was
as good as gold, as quiet as a lamb, and very fond of reading, Bishamber
kindly offered to take Phatik off his sister's hands, and educate him
with his own children in Calcutta. The widowed mother readily agreed.
When his uncle asked Phatik If he would like to go to Calcutta with him,
his joy knew no bounds, and he said; "Oh, yes, uncle!" In a way that
made it quite clear that he meant it.

It was an immense relief to the mother to get rid of Phatik. She had
a prejudice against the boy, and no love was lost between the two
brothers. She was in daily fear that he would either drown Makhan some
day in the river, or break his head in a fight, or run him into some
danger or other. At the same time she was somewhat distressed to see
Phatik's extreme eagerness to get away.

Phatik, as soon as all was settled, kept asking his uncle every minute
when they were to start. He was on pins and needles all day long with
excitement, and lay awake most of the night. He bequeathed to Makhan,
in perpetuity, his fishing-rod, his big kite and his marbles. Indeed, at
this time of departure his generosity towards Makhan was unbounded.

When they reached Calcutta, Phatik made the acquaintance of his aunt
for the first time. She was by no means pleased with this unnecessary
addition to her family. She found her own three boys quite enough
to manage without taking any one else. And to bring a village lad of
fourteen into their midst was terribly upsetting. Bishamber should
really have thought twice before committing such an indiscretion.

In this world of human affairs there is no worse nuisance than a boy
at the age of fourteen. He is neither ornamental, nor useful. It is
impossible to shower affection on him as on a little boy; and he is
always getting in the way. If he talks with a childish lisp he is called
a baby, and if he answers in a grown-up way he is called impertinent.
In fact any talk at all from him is resented. Then he is at the
unattractive, growing age. He grows out of his clothes with indecent
haste; his voice grows hoarse and breaks and quavers; his face grows
suddenly angular and unsightly. It is easy to excuse the shortcomings of
early childhood, but it is hard to tolerate even unavoidable lapses in a
boy of fourteen. The lad himself becomes painfully self-conscious. When
he talks with elderly people he is either unduly forward, or else so
unduly shy that he appears ashamed of his very existence.

Yet it is at this very age when in his heart of hearts a young lad most
craves for recognition and love; and he becomes the devoted slave of any
one who shows him consideration. But none dare openly love him, for that
would be regarded as undue indulgence, and therefore bad for the boy.
So, what with scolding and chiding, he becomes very much like a stray
dog that has lost his master.

For a boy of fourteen his own home is the only Paradise. To live in a
strange house with strange people is little short of torture, while the
height of bliss is to receive the kind looks of women, and never to be
slighted by them.

It was anguish to Phatik to be the unwelcome guest in his aunt's house,
despised by this elderly woman, and slighted, on every occasion. If she
ever asked him to do anything for her, he would be so overjoyed that he
would overdo it; and then she would tell him not to be so stupid, but to
get on with his lessons.

The cramped atmosphere of neglect in his aunt's house oppressed Phatik
so much that he felt that he could hardly breathe. He wanted to go out
into the open country and fill his lungs and breathe freely. But there
was no open country to go to. Surrounded on all sides by Calcutta houses
and walls, he would dream night after night of his village home, and
long to be back there. He remembered the glorious meadow where he used
to fly his kite all day long; the broad river-banks where he would wander
about the livelong day singing and shouting for joy; the narrow brook
where he could go and dive and swim at any time he liked. He thought of
his band of boy companions over whom he was despot; and, above all, the
memory of that tyrant mother of his, who had such a prejudice against
him, occupied him day and night. A kind of physical love like that of
animals; a longing to be in the presence of the one who is loved; an
inexpressible wistfulness during absence; a silent cry of the inmost
heart for the mother, like the lowing of a calf in the twilight;-this
love, which was almost an animal instinct, agitated the shy, nervous,
lean, uncouth and ugly boy. No one could understand it, but it preyed
upon his mind continually.

There was no more backward boy in the whole school than Phatik. He gaped
and remained silent when the teacher asked him a question, and like an
overladen ass patiently suffered all the blows that came down on his
back. When other boys were out at play, he stood wistfully by the window
and gazed at the roofs of the distant houses. And if by chance he espied
children playing on the open terrace of any roof, his heart would ache
with longing.

One day he summoned up all his courage, and asked his uncle: "Uncle,
when can I go home?"

His uncle answered; "Wait till the holidays come." But the holidays would
not come till November, and there was a long time still to wait.

One day Phatik lost his lesson-book. Even with the help of books he
had found it very difficult indeed to prepare his lesson. Now it was
impossible. Day after day the teacher would cane him unmercifully.
His condition became so abjectly miserable that even his cousins were
ashamed to own him. They began to jeer and insult him more than the
other boys. He went to his aunt at last, and told her that he had lost
his book.

His aunt pursed her lips in contempt, and said: "You great clumsy,
country lout. How can I afford, with all my family, to buy you new books
five times a month?"

That night, on his way back from school, Phatik had a bad headache with
a fit of shivering. He felt he was going to have an attack of malarial
fever. His one great fear was that he would be a nuisance to his aunt.

The next morning Phatik was nowhere to be seen. All searches in the
neighbourhood proved futile. The rain had been pouring in torrents all
night, and those who went out in search of the boy got drenched through
to the skin. At last Bisbamber asked help from the police.

At the end of the day a police van stopped at the door before the house.
It was still raining and the streets were all flooded. Two constables
brought out Phatik in their arms and placed him before Bishamber. He was
wet through from head to foot, muddy all over, his face and eyes flushed
red with fever, and his limbs all trembling. Bishamber carried him in
his arms, and took him into the inner apartments. When his wife saw him,
she exclaimed; "What a heap of trouble this boy has given us. Hadn't you
better send him home?"

Phatik heard her words, and sobbed out loud: "Uncle, I was just going
home; but they dragged me back again."

The fever rose very high, and all that night the boy was delirious.
Bishamber brought in a doctor. Phatik opened his eyes flushed with
fever, and looked up to the ceiling, and said vacantly: "Uncle, have the
holidays come yet? May I go home?"

Bishamber wiped the tears from his own eyes, and took Phatik's lean
and burning hands in his own, and sat by him through the night. The boy
began again to mutter. At last his voice became excited: "Mother," he
cried, "don't beat me like that! Mother! I am telling the truth!"

The next day Phatik became conscious for a short time. He turned his
eyes about the room, as if expecting some one to come. At last, with an
air of disappointment, his head sank back on the pillow. He turned his
face to the wall with a deep sigh.

Bishamber knew his thoughts, and, bending down his head, whispered:
"Phatik, I have sent for your mother." The day went by. The doctor said
in a troubled voice that the boy's condition was very critical.

Phatik began to cry out; "By the mark!--three fathoms. By the mark--four
fathoms. By the mark-." He had heard the sailor on the river-steamer
calling out the mark on the plumb-line. Now he was himself plumbing an
unfathomable sea.

Later in the day Phatik's mother burst into the room like a whirlwind,
and began to toss from side to side and moan and cry in a loud voice.

Bishamber tried to calm her agitation, but she flung herself on the bed,
and cried: "Phatik, my darling, my darling."

Phatik stopped his restless movements for a moment. His hands ceased
beating up and down. He said: "Eh?"

The mother cried again: "Phatik, my darling, my darling."

Phatik very slowly turned his head and, without seeing anybody, said:
"Mother, the holidays have come."




MY LORD, THE BABY

I

Raicharan was twelve years old when he came as a servant to his master's
house. He belonged to the same caste as his master, and was given his
master's little son to nurse. As time went on the boy left Raicharan's
arms to go to school. From school he went on to college, and after
college he entered the judicial service. Always, until he married,
Raicharan was his sole attendant.

But, when a mistress came into the house, Raicharan found two masters
instead of one. All his former influence passed to the new mistress.
This was compensated for by a fresh arrival. Anukul had a son born to
him, and Raicharan by his unsparing attentions soon got a complete
hold over the child. He used to toss him up in his arms, call to him in
absurd baby language, put his face close to the baby's and draw it away
again with a grin.

Presently the child was able to crawl and cross the doorway. When
Raicharan went to catch him, he would scream with mischievous laughter
and make for safety. Raicharan was amazed at the profound skill and
exact judgment the baby showed when pursued. He would say to his
mistress with a look of awe and mystery: "Your son will be a judge some
day."

New wonders came in their turn. When the baby began to toddle, that was
to Raicharan an epoch in human history. When he called his father Ba-ba
and his mother Ma-ma and Raicharan Chan-na, then Raicharan's ecstasy
knew no bounds. He went out to tell the news to all the world.

After a while Raicharan was asked to show his ingenuity in other ways.
He had, for instance, to play the part of a horse, holding the reins
between his teeth and prancing with his feet. He had also to wrestle
with his little charge, and if he could not, by a wrestler's trick, fall
on his back defeated at the end, a great outcry was certain.

About this time Anukul was transferred to a district on the banks of the
Padma. On his way through Calcutta he bought his son a little go-cart.
He bought him also a yellow satin waistcoat, a gold-laced cap, and some
gold bracelets and anklets. Raicharan was wont to take these out, and
put them on his little charge with ceremonial pride, whenever they went
for a walk.

Then came the rainy season, and day after day the rain poured down in
torrents. The hungry river, like an enormous serpent, swallowed down
terraces, villages, cornfields, and covered with its flood the tall
grasses and wild casuarinas on the sand-banks. From time to time there
was a deep thud, as the river-banks crumbled. The unceasing roar of
the rain current could be beard from far away. Masses of foam, carried
swiftly past, proved to the eye the swiftness of the stream.

One afternoon the rain cleared. It was cloudy, but cool and bright.
Raicharan's little despot did not want to stay in on such a fine
afternoon. His lordship climbed into the go-cart. Raicharan, between the
shafts, dragged him slowly along till he reached the rice-fields on the
banks of the river. There was no one in the fields, and no boat on the
stream. Across the water, on the farther side, the clouds were rifted in
the west. The silent ceremonial of the setting sun was revealed in all
its glowing splendour. In the midst of that stillness the child, all of
a sudden, pointed with his finger in front of him and cried: "Chan-nal
Pitty fow."

Close by on a mud-flat stood a large Kadamba tree in full flower. My
lord, the baby, looked at it with greedy eyes, and Raicharan knew his
meaning. Only a short time before he had made, out of these very
flower balls, a small go-cart; and the child had been so entirely happy
dragging it about with a string, that for the whole day Raicharan was
not made to put on the reins at all. He was promoted from a horse into a
groom.

But Raicharan had no wish that evening to go splashing knee-deep through
the mud to reach the flowers. So he quickly pointed his finger in the
opposite direction, calling out: "Oh, look, baby, look! Look at the
bird." And with all sorts of curious noises he pushed the go-cart
rapidly away from the tree.

But a child, destined to be a judge, cannot be put off so easily. And
besides, there was at the time nothing to attract his eyes. And you
cannot keep up for ever the pretence of an imaginary bird.

The little Master's mind was made up, and Raicharan was at his wits'
end. "Very well, baby," he said at last, "you sit still in the cart, and
I'll go and get you the pretty flower. Only mind you don't go near the
water."

As he said this, he made his legs bare to the knee, and waded through
the oozing mud towards the tree.

The moment Raicharan had gone, his little Master went off at racing
speed to the forbidden water. The baby saw the river rushing by,
splashing and gurgling as it went. It seemed as though the disobedient
wavelets themselves were running away from some greater Raicharan with
the laughter of a thousand children. At the sight of their mischief,
the heart of the human child grew excited and restless. He got down
stealthily from the go-cart and toddled off towards the river. On his
way he picked up a small stick, and leant over the bank of the stream
pretending to fish. The mischievous fairies of the river with their
mysterious voices seemed inviting him into their play-house.

Raicharan had plucked a handful of flowers from the tree, and was
carrying them back in the end of his cloth, with his face wreathed in
smiles. But when he reached the go-cart, there was no one there. He
looked on all sides and there was no one there. He looked back at the
cart and there was no one there.

In that first terrible moment his blood froze within him. Before his
eyes the whole universe swam round like a dark mist. From the depth
of his broken heart he gave one piercing cry; "Master, Master, little
Master."

But no voice answered "Chan-na." No child laughed mischievously back; no
scream of baby delight welcomed his return. Only the river ran on, with
its splashing, gurgling noise as before,--as though it knew nothing at
all, and had no time to attend to such a tiny human event as the death
of a child.

As the evening passed by Raicharan's mistress became very anxious. She
sent men out on all sides to search. They went with lanterns in their
hands, and reached at last the banks of the Padma. There they found
Raicharan rushing up and down the fields, like a stormy wind, shouting
the cry of despair: "Master, Master, little Master!"

When they got Raicharan home at last, he fell prostrate at his
mistress's feet. They shook him, and questioned him, and asked him
repeatedly where he had left the child; but all he could say was, that
he knew nothing.

Though every one held the opinion that the Padma had swallowed the
child, there was a lurking doubt left in the mind. For a band of gipsies
had been noticed outside the village that afternoon, and some suspicion
rested on them. The mother went so far in her wild grief as to think
it possible that Raicharan himself had stolen the child. She called him
aside with piteous entreaty and said: "Raicharan, give me back my baby.
Oh! give me back my child. Take from me any money you ask, but give me
back my child!"

Raicharan only beat his forehead in reply. His mistress ordered him out
of the house.

Artukul tried to reason his wife out of this wholly unjust suspicion:
"Why on earth," he said, "should he commit such a crime as that?"

The mother only replied: "The baby had gold ornaments on his body. Who
knows?"

It was impossible to reason with her after that.

II

Raicharan went back to his own village. Up to this time he had had no
son, and there was no hope that any child would now be born to him. But
it came about before the end of a year that his wife gave birth to a son
and died.

All overwhelming resentment at first grew up in Raicharan's heart at the
sight of this new baby. At the back of his mind was resentful suspicion
that it had come as a usurper in place of the little Master. He also
thought it would be a grave offence to be happy with a son of his own
after what had happened to his master's little child. Indeed, if it had
not been for a widowed sister, who mothered the new baby, it would not
have lived long.

But a change gradually came over Raicharan's mind. A wonderful thing
happened. This new baby in turn began to crawl about, and cross the
doorway with mischief in its face. It also showed an amusing cleverness
in making its escape to safety. Its voice, its sounds of laughter and
tears, its gestures, were those of the little Master. On some days,
when Raicharan listened to its crying, his heart suddenly began thumping
wildly against his ribs, and it seemed to him that his former little
Master was crying somewhere in the unknown land of death because he had
lost his Chan-na.

Phailna (for that was the name Raicharan's sister gave to the new baby)
soon began to talk. It learnt to say Ba-ba and Ma-ma with a baby accent.
When Raicharan heard those familiar sounds the mystery suddenly became
clear. The little Master could not cast off the spell of his Chan-na,
and therefore he had been reborn in his own house.

The arguments in favour of this were, to Raicharan, altogether beyond
dispute:

(i.) The new baby was born soon after his little master's death.

(ii.) His wife could never have accumulated such merit as to give birth
to a son in middle age.

(iii.) The new baby walked with a toddle and called out Ba-ba and Ma-ma.
There was no sign lacking which marked out the future judge.

Then suddenly Raicharan remembered that terrible accusation of the
mother. "Ah," he said to himself with amazement, "the mother's heart was
right. She knew I had stolen her child." When once he had come to this
conclusion, he was filled with remorse for his past neglect. He now gave
himself over, body and soul, to the new baby, and became its devoted
attendant. He began to bring it up, as if it were the son of a rich man.
He bought a go-cart, a yellow satin waistcoat, and a gold-embroidered
cap. He melted down the ornaments of his dead wife, and made gold
bangles and anklets. He refused to let the little child play with any
one of the neighbourhood, and became himself its sole companion day and
night. As the baby grew up to boyhood, he was so petted and spoilt
and clad in such finery that the village children would call him "Your
Lordship," and jeer at him; and older people regarded Raicharan as
unaccountably crazy about the child.

At last the time came for the boy to go to school. Raicharan sold his
small piece of land, and went to Calcutta. There he got employment with
great difficulty as a servant, and sent Phailna to school. He spared no
pains to give him the best education, the best clothes, the best food.
Meanwhile he lived himself on a mere handful of rice, and would say in
secret: "Ah! my little Master, my dear little Master, you loved me so
much that you came back to my house. You shall never suffer from any
neglect of mine."

Twelve years passed away in this manner. The boy was able to read and
write well. He was bright and healthy and good-looking. He paid a great
deal of attention to his personal appearance, and was specially careful
in parting his hair. He was inclined to extravagance and finery, and
spent money freely. He could never quite look on Raicharan as a father,
because, though fatherly in affection, he had the manner of a servant.
A further fault was this, that Raicharan kept secret from every one that
himself was the father of the child.

The students of the hostel, where Phailna was a boarder, were greatly
amused by Raicharan's country manners, and I have to confess that behind
his father's back Phailna joined in their fun. But, in the bottom of
their hearts, all the students loved the innocent and tender-hearted old
man, and Phailna was very fond of him also. But, as I have said before,
he loved him with a kind of condescension.

Raicharan grew older and older, and his employer was continually finding
fault with him for his incompetent work. He had been starving himself
for the boy's sake. So he had grown physically weak, and no longer up to
his work. He would forget things, and his mind became dull and stupid.
But his employer expected a full servant's work out of him, and would
not brook excuses. The money that Raicharan had brought with him from
the sale of his land was exhausted. The boy was continually grumbling
about his clothes, and asking for more money.

Raicharan made up his mind. He gave up the situation where he was
working as a servant, and left some money with Phailna and said: "I have
some business to do at home in my village, and shall be back soon."

He went off at once to Baraset where Anukul was magistrate. Anukul's
wife was still broken down with grief. She had had no other child.

One day Anukul was resting after a long and weary day in court. His wife
was buying, at an exorbitant price, a herb from a mendicant quack, which
was said to ensure the birth of a child. A voice of greeting was
heard in the courtyard. Anukul went out to see who was there. It was
Raicharan. Anukul's heart was softened when he saw his old servant. He
asked him many questions, and offered to take him back into service.

Raicharan smiled faintly, and said in reply; "I want to make obeisance
to my mistress."

Anukul went with Raicharan into the house, where the mistress did not
receive him as warmly as his old master. Raicharan took no notice of
this, but folded his hands, and said: "It was not the Padma that stole
your baby. It was I."

Anukul exclaimed: "Great God! Eh! What! Where is he?" Raicharan replied:
"He is with me, I will bring him the day after to-morrow."

It was Sunday. There was no magistrate's court sitting. Both husband and
wife were looking expectantly along the road, waiting from early morning
for Raicharan's appearance. At ten o'clock he came, leading Phailna by
the hand.

Anukul's wife, without a question, took the boy into her lap, and was
wild with excitement, sometimes laughing, sometimes weeping, touching
him, kissing his hair and his forehead, and gazing into his face with
hungry, eager eyes. The boy was very good-looking and dressed like a
gentleman's son. The heart of Anukul brimmed over with a sudden rush of
affection.

Nevertheless the magistrate in him asked: "Have you any proofs?"
Raicharan said: "How could there be any proof of such a deed? God alone
knows that I stole your boy, and no one else in the world."

When Anukul saw how eagerly his wife was clinging to the boy, he
realised the futility of asking for proofs. It would be wiser to
believe. And then--where could an old man like Raicharan get such a boy
from? And why should his faithful servant deceive him for nothing?

"But," he added severely, "Raicharan, you must not stay here."

"Where shall I go, Master?" said Raicharan, in a choking voice, folding
his hands; "I am old. Who will take in an old man as a servant?"

The mistress said: "Let him stay. My child will be pleased. I forgive
him."

But Anukul's magisterial conscience would not allow him. "No," he said,
"he cannot be forgiven for what he has done."

Raicharan bowed to the ground, and clasped Anukul's feet. "Master," he
cried, "let me stay. It was not I who did it. It was God."

Anukul's conscience was worse stricken than ever, when Raicharan tried
to put the blame on God's shoulders.

"No," he said, "I could not allow it. I cannot trust you any more. You
have done an act of treachery."

Raicharan rose to his feet and said: "It was not I who did it."

"Who was it then?" asked Anukul.

Raicharan replied: "It was my fate."

But no educated man could take this for an excuse. Anukul remained
obdurate.

When Phailna saw that he was the wealthy magistrate's son, and not
Raicharan's, he was angry at first, thinking that he had been cheated
all this time of his birthright. But seeing Raicharan in distress, he
generously said to his father: "Father, forgive him. Even if you don't
let him live with us, let him have a small monthly pension."

After hearing this, Raicharan did not utter another word. He looked
for the last time on the face of his son; he made obeisance to his
old master and mistress. Then he went out, and was mingled with the
numberless people of the world.

At the end of the month Anukul sent him some money to his village. But
the money came back. There was no one there of the name of Raicharan.





THE KINGDOM OF CARDS

I

Once upon a time there was a lonely island in a distant sea where lived
the Kings and Queens, the Aces and the Knaves, in the Kingdom of Cards.
The Tens and Nines, with the Twos and Threes, and all the other members,
had long ago settled there also. But these were not twice-born people,
like the famous Court Cards.

The Ace, the King, and the Knave were the three highest castes. The
fourth Caste was made up of a mixture of the lower Cards. The Twos and
Threes were lowest of all. These inferior Cards were never allowed to
sit in the same row with the great Court Cards.

Wonderful indeed were the regulations and rules of that island kingdom.
The particular rank of each individual had been settled from time
immemorial. Every one had his own appointed work, and never did anything
else. An unseen hand appeared to be directing them wherever they
went,--according to the Rules.

No one in the Kingdom of Cards had any occasion to think: no one had any
need to come to any decision: no one was ever required to debate any
new subject. The citizens all moved along in a listless groove without
speech. When they fell, they made no noise. They lay down on their
backs, and gazed upward at the sky with each prim feature firmly fixed
for ever.

There was a remarkable stillness in the Kingdom of Cards. Satisfaction
and contentment were complete in all their rounded wholeness. There
was never any uproar or violence. There was never any excitement or
enthusiasm.

The great ocean, crooning its lullaby with one unceasing melody, lapped
the island to sleep with a thousand soft touches of its wave's white
hands. The vast sky, like the outspread azure wings of the brooding
mother-bird, nestled the island round with its downy plume. For on the
distant horizon a deep blue line betokened another shore. But no sound
of quarrel or strife could reach the Island of Cards, to break its calm
repose.

II

In that far-off foreign land across the sea, there lived a young Prince
whose mother was a sorrowing queen. This queen had fallen from favour,
and was living with her only son on the seashore. The Prince passed his
childhood alone and forlorn, sitting by his forlorn mother, weaving the
net of his big desires. He longed to go in search of the Flying Horse,
the Jewel in the Cobra's hood, the Rose of Heaven, the Magic Roads, or
to find where the Princess Beauty was sleeping in the Ogre's castle over
the thirteen rivers and across the seven seas.

From the Son of the Merchant at school the young Prince learnt the
stories of foreign kingdoms. From the Son of the Kotwal he learnt the
adventures of the Two Genii of the Lamp. And when the rain came beating
down, and the clouds covered the sky, he would sit on the threshold
facing the sea, and say to his sorrowing mother: "Tell me, mother, a
story of some very far-off land."

And his mother would tell him an endless tale she had heard in her
childhood of a wonderful country beyond the sea where dwelt the Princess
Beauty. And the heart of the young Prince would become sick with
longing, as he sat on the threshold, looking out on the ocean, listening
to his mother's wonderful story, while the rain outside came beating
down and the grey clouds covered the sky.

One day the Son of the Merchant came to the Prince, and said boldly:
"Comrade, my studies are over. I am now setting out on my travels to
seek my fortunes on the sea. I have come to bid you good-bye."

The Prince said; "I will go with you."

And the Son of Kotwal said also: "Comrades, trusty and true, you will
not leave me behind. I also will be your companion."

Then the young Prince said to his sorrowing mother; "Mother, I am now
setting out on my travels to seek my fortune. When I come back once
more, I shall surely have found some way to remove all your sorrow."

So the Three Companions set out on their travels together. In the
harbour were anchored the twelve ships of the merchant, and the Three
Companions got on board. The south wind was blowing, and the twelve
ships sailed away, as fast as the desires which rose in the Prince's
breast.

At the Conch Shell Island they filled one ship with conchs. At the
Sandal Wood Island they filled a second ship with sandal-wood, and at
the Coral Island they filled a third ship with coral.

Four years passed away, and they filled four more ships, one with ivory,
one with musk, one with cloves, and one with nutmegs.

But when these ships were all loaded a terrible tempest arose. The ships
were all of them sunk, with their cloves and nutmeg, and musk and
ivory, and coral and sandal-wood and conchs. But the ship with the Three
Companions struck on an island reef, buried them safe ashore, and itself
broke in pieces.

This was the famous Island of Cards, where lived the Ace and King
and Queen and Knave, with the Nines and Tens and all the other
Members--according to the Rules.

III

Up till now there had been nothing to disturb that island stillness. No
new thing had ever happened. No discussion had ever been held.

And then, of a sudden, the Three Companions appeared, thrown up by
the sea,--and the Great Debate began. There were three main points of
dispute.

First, to what caste should these unclassed strangers belong? Should
they rank with the Court Cards? Or were they merely lower-caste people,
to be ranked with the Nines and Tens? No precedent could be quoted to
decide this weighty question.

Secondly, what was their clan? Had they the fairer hue and bright
complexion of the Hearts, or was theirs the darker complexion of the
Clubs? Over this question there were interminable disputes. The whole
marriage system of the island, with its intricate regulations, would
depend on its nice adjustment.

Thirdly, what food should they take? With whom should they live and
sleep? And should their heads be placed south-west, north-west, or only
north-east? In all the Kingdom of Cards a series of problems so vital
and critical had never been debated before.

But the Three Companions grew desperately hungry. They had to get
food in some way or other. So while this debate went on, with its
interminable silence and pauses, and while the Aces called their own
meeting, and formed themselves into a Committee, to find some obsolete
dealing with the question, the Three Companions themselves were eating
all they could find, and drinking out of every vessel, and breaking all
regulations.

Even the Twos and Threes were shocked at this outrageous behaviour. The
Threes said; "Brother Twos, these people are openly shameless!" And
the Twos said: "Brother Threes, they are evidently of lower caste than
ourselves!" After their meal was over, the Three Companions went for a
stroll in the city.

When they saw the ponderous people moving in their dismal processions
with prim and solemn faces, then the Prince turned to the Son of the
Merchant and the Son of the Kotwal, and threw back his head, and gave
one stupendous laugh.

Down Royal Street and across Ace Square and along the Knave Embankment
ran the quiver of this strange, unheard-of laughter, the laughter that,
amazed at itself, expired in the vast vacuum of silence.

The Son of the Kotwal and the Son of the Merchant were chilled through
to the bone by the ghost-like stillness around them. They turned to the
Prince, and said: "Comrade, let us away. Let us not stop for a moment in
this awful land of ghosts."

But the Prince said: "Comrades, these people resemble men, so I am going
to find out, by shaking them upside down and outside in, whether they
have a single drop of warm living blood left in their veins."

IV

The days passed one by one, and the placid existence of the Island went
on almost without a ripple. The Three Companions obeyed no rules nor
regulations. They never did anything correctly either in sitting or
standing or turning themselves round or lying on their back. On the
contrary, wherever they saw these things going on precisely and exactly
according to the Rules, they gave way to inordinate laughter. They
remained unimpressed altogether by the eternal gravity of those eternal
regulations.

One day the great Court Cards came to the Son of the Kotwal and the Son
of the Merchant and the Prince.

"Why," they asked slowly, "are you not moving according to the Rules?"

The Three Companions answered: "Because that is our Ichcha (wish)."

The great Court Cards with hollow, cavernous voices, as if slowly
awakening from an age-long dream, said together: "Ich-cha! And pray who
is Ich-cha?"

They could not understand who Ichcha was then, but the whole island
was to understand it by-and-by. The first glimmer of light passed the
threshold of their minds when they found out, through watching the
actions of the Prince, that they might move in a straight line in an
opposite direction from the one in which they had always gone before.
Then they made another startling discovery, that there was another side
to the Cards which they had never yet noticed with attention. This was
the beginning of the change.

Now that the change had begun, the Three Companions were able to
initiate them more and more deeply into the mysteries of Ichcha. The
Cards gradually became aware that life was not bound by regulations.
They began to feel a secret satisfaction in the kingly power of choosing
for themselves.

But with this first impact of Ichcha the whole pack of cards began to
totter slowly, and then tumble down to the ground. The scene was like
that of some huge python awaking from a long sleep, as it slowly unfolds
its numberless coils with a quiver that runs through its whole frame.

V

Hitherto the Queens of Spades and Clubs and Diamonds and Hearts had
remained behind curtains with eyes that gazed vacantly into space, or
else remained fixed upon the ground.

And now, all of a sudden, on an afternoon in spring the Queen of Hearts
from the balcony raised her dark eyebrows for a moment, and cast a
single glance upon the Prince from the corner of her eye.

"Great God," cried the Prince, "I thought they were all painted images.
But I am wrong. They are women after all."

Then the young Prince called to his side his two Companions, and said
in a meditative voice; "My comrades! There is a charm about these ladies
that I never noticed before. When I saw that glance of the Queen's dark,
luminous eyes, brightening with new emotion, it seemed to me like the
first faint streak of dawn in a newly created world."

The two Companions smiled a knowing smile, and said: "Is that really so,
Prince?"

And the poor Queen of Hearts from that day went from bad to worse.
She began to forget all rules in a truly scandalous manner. If, for
instance, her place in the row was beside the Knave, she suddenly found
herself quite accidentally standing beside the Prince instead. At this,
the Knave, with motionless face and solemn voice, would say: "Queen, you
have made a mistake."

And the poor Queen of Hearts' red cheeks would get redder than ever. But
the Prince would come gallantly to her rescue and say: "No! There is no
mistake. From to-day I am going to be Knave!"

Now it came to pass that, while every one was trying to correct the
improprieties of the guilty Queen of Hearts, they began to make mistakes
themselves. The Aces found themselves elbowed out by the Kings. The
Kings got muddled up with the Knaves. The Nines and Tens assumed airs as
though they belonged to the Great Court Cards. The Twos and Threes were
found secretly taking the places specially resented for the Fours and
Fives. Confusion had never been so confounded before.

Many spring seasons had come and gone in that Island of Cards. The
Kokil, the bird of Spring, had sung its song year after year. But it had
never stirred the blood as it stirred it now. In days gone by the sea
had sung its tireless melody. But, then, it had proclaimed only the
inflexible monotony of the Rule. And suddenly its waves were telling,
through all their flashing light and luminous shade and myriad voices,
the deepest yearnings of the heart of love!

VI

Where are vanished now their prim, round, regular, complacent features?
Here is a face full of love-sick longing. Here is a heart heating wild
with regrets. Here is a mind racked sore with doubts. Music and sighing,
and smiles and tears, are filling the air. Life is throbbing; hearts are
breaking; passions are kindling.

Every one is now thinking of his own appearance, and comparing himself
with others. The Ace of Clubs is musing to himself, that the King of
Spades may be just passably good-looking. "But," says he, "when I walk
down the street you have only to see how people's eyes turn towards me."
The King of Spades is saying; "Why on earth is that Ace of Clubs always
straining his neck and strutting about like a peacock? He imagines all
the Queens are dying of love for him, while the real fact is--" Here he
pauses, and examines his face in the glass.

But the Queens were the worst of all. They began to spend all their time
in dressing themselves up to the Nines. And the Nines would become their
hopeless and abject slaves. But their cutting remarks about one another
were more shocking still.

So the young men would sit listless on the leaves under the trees,
lolling with outstretched limbs in the forest shade. And the young
maidens, dressed in pale-blue robes, would come walking accidentally to
the same shade of the same forest by the same trees, and turn their eyes
as though they saw no one there, and look as though they came out to see
nothing at all. And then one young man more forward than the rest in
a fit of madness would dare to go near to a maiden in blue. But, as he
drew near, speech would forsake him. He would stand there tongue-tied
and foolish, and the favourable moment would pass.

The Kokil birds were singing in the boughs overhead. The mischievous
South wind was blowing; it disarrayed the hair, it whispered in the
ear, and stirred the music in the blood. The leaves of the trees were
murmuring with rustling delight. And the ceaseless sound of the ocean
made all the mute longings of the heart of man and maid surge backwards
and forwards on the full springtide of love.

The Three Companions had brought into the dried-up channels of the
Kingdom of Cards the full flood-tide of a new life.

VII

And, though the tide was full, there-was a pause as though the rising
waters would not break into foam but remain suspended for ever. There
were no outspoken words, only a cautious going forward one step and
receding two. All seemed busy heaping up their unfulfilled desires
like castles in the air, or fortresses of sand. They were pale and
speechless, their eyes were burning, their lips trembling with unspoken
secrets.

The Prince saw what was wrong. He summoned every one on the Island and
said: "Bring hither the flutes and the cymbals, the pipes and drums.
Let all be played together, and raise loud shouts of rejoicing. For the
Queen of Hearts this very night is going to choose her Mate!"

So the Tens and Nines began to blow on their flutes and pipes; the
Eights and Sevens played on their sackbuts and viols; and even the Twos
and Threes began to beat madly on their drums.

When this tumultous gust of music came, it swept away at one blast all
those sighings and mopings. And then what a torrent of laughter and
words poured forth! There were daring proposals and locking refusals,
and gossip and chatter, and jests and merriment. It was like the swaying
and shaking, and rustling and soughing, in a summer gale, of a million
leaves and branches in the depth of the primeval forest.

But the Queen of Hearts, in a rose-red robe, sat silent in the shadow
of her secret bower, and listened to the great uproarious sound of music
and mirth, that came floating towards her. She shut her eyes, and dreamt
her dream of lore. And when she opened them she found the Prince seated
on the ground before her gazing up at her face. And she covered her eyes
with both hands, and shrank back quivering with an inward tumult of joy.

And the Prince passed the whole day alone, walking by the side of the
surging sea. He carried in his mind that startled look, that shrinking
gesture of the Queen, and his heart beat high with hope.

That night the serried, gaily-dressed ranks of young men and maidens
waited with smiling faces at the Palace Gates. The Palace Hall was
lighted with fairy lamps and festooned with the flowers of spring.
Slowly the Queen of Hearts entered, and the whole assembly rose to greet
her. With a jasmine garland in her hand, she stood before the Prince
with downcast eyes. In her lowly bashfulness she could hardly raise the
garland to the neck of the Mate she had chosen. But the Prince bowed his
head, and the garland slipped to its place. The assembly of youths and
maidens had waited her choice with eager, expectant hush. And when
the choice was made, the whole vast concourse rocked and swayed with a
tumult of wild delight. And the sound of their shouts was heard in every
part of the island, and by ships far out at sea. Never had such a shout
been raised in the Kingdom of Cards before.

And they carried the Prince and his Bride, and seated them on the
throne, and crowned them then and there in the Ancient Island of Cards.

And the sorrowing Mother Queen, on the 'far-off island shore on the
other side of the sea, came sailing to her son's new kingdom in a ship
adorned with gold.

And the citizens are no longer regulated according to the Rules, but are
good or bad, or both, according to their Ichcha.




THE DEVOTEE

At a time, when my unpopularity with a part of my readers had reached
the nadir of its glory, and my name had become the central orb of the
journals, to be attended through space with a perpetual rotation of
revilement, I felt the necessity to retire to some quiet place and
endeavour to forget my own existence.

I have a house in the country some miles away from Calcutta, where I
can remain unknown and unmolested. The villagers there have not, as yet,
come to any conclusion about me. They know I am no mere holiday-maker or
pleasure-seeker; for I never outrage the silence of the village nights
with the riotous noises of the city. Nor do they regard me as ascetic,
because the little acquaintance they have of me carries the savour of
comfort about it. I am not, to them, a traveller; for, though I am a
vagabond by nature, my wandering through the village fields is aimless.
They are hardly even quite certain whether I am married or single; for
they have never seen me with my children. So, not being able to classify
me in any animal or vegetable kingdom that they know, they have long
since given me up and left me stolidly alone.

But quite lately I have come to know that there is one person in the
village who is deeply interested in me. Our acquaintance began on a
sultry afternoon in July. There had been rain all the morning, and the
air was still wet and heavy with mist, like eyelids when weeping is
over.

I sat lazily watching a dappled cow grazing on the high bank of the
river. The afternoon sun was playing on her glossy hide. The simple
beauty of this dress of light made me wonder idly at man's deliberate
waste of money in setting up tailors' shops to deprive his own skin of
its natural clothing.

While I was thus watching and lazily musing, a woman of middle age came
and prostrated herself before me, touching the ground with her forehead.
She carried in her robe some bunches of flowers, one of which she
offered to me with folded hands. She said to me, as she offered it:
"This is an offering to my God."

She went away. I was so taken aback as she uttered these words, that
I could hardly catch a glimpse of her before she was gone. The whole
incident was entirely simple, but it left a deep impression on my mind;
and as I turned back once more to look at the cattle in the field,
the zest of life in the cow, who was munching the lush grass with deep
breaths, while she whisked off the flies, appeared to me fraught with
mystery. My readers may laugh at my foolishness, but my heart was full
of adoration. I offered my worship to the pure joy of living, which is
God's own life. Then, plucking a tender shoot from the mango tree, I
fed the cow with it from my own hand, and as I did this I had the
satisfaction of having pleased my God.

The next year when I returned to the village it was February. The cold
season still lingered on. The morning sun came into my room, and I was
grateful for its warmth. I was writing, when the servant came to tell me
that a devotee, of the Vishnu cult, wanted to see me. I told him, in
an absent way, to bring her upstairs, and went on with my writing. The
Devotee came in, and bowed to me, touching my feet. I found that she was
the same woman whom I had met, for a brief moment, a year ago.

I was able now to examine her more closely. She was past that age when
one asks the question whether a woman is beautiful or not. Her stature
was above the ordinary height, and she was strongly built; but her body
was slightly bent owing to her constant attitude of veneration. Her
manner had nothing shrinking about it. The most remarkable of her
features were her two eyes. They seemed to have a penetrating power
which could make distance near.

With those two large eyes of hers, she seemed to push me as she entered.

"What is this?" she asked. "Why have you brought me here before your
throne, my God? I used to see you among the trees; and that was much
better. That was the true place to meet you."

She must have seen me walking in the garden without my seeing her. For
the last few clays, however, I had suffered from a cold, and had been
prevented from going out. I had, perforce, to stay indoors and pay my
homage to the evening sky from my terrace. After a silent pause the
Devotee said to me: "O my God, give me some words of good."

I was quite unprepared for this abrupt request, and answered her on the
spur of the moment: "Good words I neither give nor receive. I simply
open my eyes and keep silence, and then I can at once both hear and see,
even when no sound is uttered. Now, while I am looking at you, it is as
good as listening to your voice."

The Devotee became quite excited as I spoke, and exclaimed: "God speaks
to me, not only with His mouth, but with His whole body."

I said to her: "When I am silent I can listen with my whole body. I have
come away from Calcutta here to listen to that sound."

The Devotee said: "Yes, I know that, and therefore I have come here to
sit by you."

Before taking her leave, she again bowed to me, and touched my feet.
I could see that she was distressed, because my feet were covered. She
wished them to be bare.

Early next morning I came out, and sat on my terrace on the roof. Beyond
the line of trees southward I could see the open country chill and
desolate. I could watch the sun rising over the sugar-cane in the East,
beyond the clump of trees at the side of the village. Out of the deep
shadow of those dark trees the village road suddenly appeared. It
stretched forward, winding its way to some distant villages on the
horizon, till it was lost in the grey of the mist.

That morning it was difficult to say whether the sun had risen or not. A
white fog was still clinging to the tops of the trees. I saw the Devotee
walking through the blurred dawn, like a mist-wraith of the morning
twilight. She was singing her chant to God, and sounding her cymbals.

The thick haze lifted at last; and the sun, like the kindly grandsire of
the village, took his seat amid all the work that was going on in home
and field.

When I had just settled down at my writing-table, to appease the hungry
appetite of my editor in Calcutta, there came a sound of footsteps on
the stair, and the Devotee, humming a tune to herself, entered, and
bowed before me. I lifted my head from my papers.

She said to me: "My God, yesterday I took as sacred food what was left
over from your meal."

I was startled, and asked her how she could do that.

"Oh," she said, "I waited at your door in the evening, while you were at
dinner, and took some food from your plate when it was carried out."

This was a surprise to me, for every one in the village knew that I had
been to Europe, and had eaten with Europeans. I was a vegetarian, no
doubt, but the sanctity of my cook would not bear investigation, and the
orthodox regarded my food as polluted.

The Devotee, noticing my sign of surprise, said: "My God, why should I
come to you at all, if I could not take your food?"

I asked her what her own caste people would say. She told me she had
already spread the news far and wide all over the village. The caste
people had shaken their heads, but agreed that she must go her own way.

I found out that the Devotee came from a good family in the country, and
that her mother was well to-do, and desired to keep her daughter. But
she preferred to be a mendicant. I asked her how she made her living.
She told me that her followers had given her a piece of land, and that
she begged her food from door to door. She said to me: "The food which I
get by begging is divine."

After I had thought over what she said, I understood her meaning. When
we get our food precariously as alms, we remember God the giver. But
when we receive our food regularly at home, as a matter of course, we
are apt to regard it as ours by right.


I had a great desire to ask her about her husband. But as she never
mentioned him even indirectly, I did not question her.

I found out very soon that the Devotee had no respect at all for that
part of the village where the people of the higher castes lived.

"They never give," she said, "a single farthing to God's service; and
yet they have the largest share of God's glebe. But the poor worship and
starve."

I asked her why she did not go and live among these godless people,
and help them towards a better life. "That," I said with some unction,
"would be the highest form of divine worship."

I had heard sermons of this kind from time to time, and I am rather fond
of copying them myself for the public benefit, when the chance comes.

But the Devotee was not at all impressed. She raised her big round eyes,
and looked straight into mine, and said:

"You mean to say that because God is with the sinners, therefore when
you do them any service you do it to God? Is that so?"

"Yes," I replied, "that is my meaning."

"Of course," she answered almost impatiently, "of course, God is with
them: otherwise, how could they go on living at all? But what is that to
me? My God is not there. My God cannot be worshipped among them; because
I do not find Him there. I seek Him where I can find Him."

As she spoke, she made obeisance to me. What she meant to say was really
this. A mere doctrine of God's omnipresence does not help us. That God
is all-pervading,--this truth may be a mere intangible abstraction, and
therefore unreal to ourselves. Where I can see Him, there is His reality
in my soul.

I need not explain that all the while she showered her devotion on me
she did it to me not as an individual. I was simply a vehicle of her
divine worship. It was not for me either to receive it or to refuse it:
for it was not mine, but God's.

When the Devotee came again, she found me once more engaged with my
books and papers.

"What have you been doing," she said, with evident vexation, "that my
God should make you undertake such drudgery? Whenever I come, I find you
reading and writing."

"God keeps his useless people busy," I answered; "otherwise they would
be bound to get into mischief. They have to do all the least necessary
things in life. It keeps them out of trouble."

The Devotee told me that she could not bear the encumbrances, with
which, day by day, I was surrounded. If she wanted to see me, she was
not allowed by the servants to come straight upstairs. If she wanted
to touch my feet in worship, there were my socks always in the way. And
when she wanted to have a simple talk with me, she found my mind lost in
a wilderness of letters.

This time, before she left me, she folded her hands, and said: "My God!
I felt your feet in my breast this morning. Oh, how cool! And they were
bare, not covered. I held them upon my head for a long time in worship.
That filled my very being. Then, after that, pray what was the use of my
coming to you yourself? Why did I come? My Lord, tell me truly,--wasn't
it a mere infatuation?"

There were some flowers in my vase on the table. While she was there,
the gardener brought some new flowers to put in their place. The Devotee
saw him changing them.

"Is that all?" she exclaimed. "Have you done with the flowers? Then give
them to me."

She held the flowers tenderly in the cup of her hands, and began to gaze
at them with bent head. After a few moments' silence she raised her head
again, and said to me: "You never look at these flowers; therefore they
become stale to you. If you would only look into them, then your reading
and writing would go to the winds."

She tied the flowers together in the end of her robe, and placed them,
in an attitude of worship, on the top of her head, saying reverently:
"Let me carry my God with me."

While she did this, I felt that flowers in our rooms do not receive
their due meed of loving care at our hands. When we stick them in vases,
they are more like a row of naughty schoolboys standing on a form to be
punished.

The Devotee came again the same evening, and sat by my feet on the
terrace of the roof.

"I gave away those flowers," she said, "as I went from house to house
this morning, singing God's name. Beni, the head man of our village,
laughed at me for my devotion, and said: 'Why do you waste all
this devotion on Him? Don't you know He is reviled up and down the
countryside?' Is that true, my God? Is it true that they are hard upon
you?"

For a moment I shrank into myself. It was a shock to find that the
stains of printers' ink could reach so far.

The Devotee went on: "Beni imagined that he could blow out the flame
of my devotion at one breath! But this is no mere tiny flame: it is a
burning fire. Why do they abuse you, my God?"

I said: "Because I deserved it. I suppose in my greed I was loitering
about to steal people's hearts in secret."

The Devotee said: "Now you see for yourself how little their hearts are
worth. They are full of poison, and this will cure you of your greed."

"When a man," I answered, "has greed in his heart, he is always on
the verge of being beaten. The greed itself supplies his enemies with
poison."

"Our merciful God," she replied, "beats us with His own hand, and drives
away all the poison. He who endures God's beating to the end is saved."

II.

That evening the Devotee told me the story of her life. The stars of
evening rose and set behind the trees, as she went on to the end of her
tale.

"My husband is very simple. Some people think that he is a simpleton;
but I know that those who understand simply, understand truly. In
business and household management he was able to hold his own. Because
his needs were small, and his wants few, he could manage carefully
on what we had. He would never meddle in other matters, nor try to
understand them.

"Both my husband's parents died before we had been married long, and we
were left alone. But my husband always needed some one to be over him. I
am ashamed to confess that he had a sort of reverence for me, and looked
upon me as his superior. But I am sure that he could understand things
better than I, though I had greater powers of talking.

"Of all the people in the world he held his Guru Thakur (spiritual
master) in the highest veneration. Indeed it was not veneration merely
but love; and such love as his is rare.

"Guru Thakur was younger than my husband. Oh! how beautiful he was!

"My husband had played games with him when he was a boy; and from that
time forward he had dedicated his heart and soul to this friend of his
early days. Thakur knew how simple my husband was, and used to tease him
mercilessly.

"He and his comrades would play jokes upon him for their own amusement;
but he would bear them all with longsuffering.

"When I married into this family, Guru Thakur was studying at Benares.
My husband used to pay all his expenses. I was eighteen years old when
he returned home to our village.

"At the age of fifteen I had my child. I was so young I did not know
how to take care of him. I was fond of gossip, and liked to be with my
village friends for hours together. I used to get quite cross with
my boy when I was compelled to stay at home and nurse him. Alas! my
child-God came into my life, but His playthings were not ready for Him.
He came to the mother's heart, but the mother's heart lagged behind. He
left me in anger; and ever since I have been searching for Him up and
down the world.

"The boy was the joy of his father's life. My careless neglect used to
pain my husband. But his was a mute soul. He has never been able to give
expression to his pain.

"The wonderful thing was this, that in spite of my neglect the child
used to love me more than any one else. He seemed to have the dread that
I would one day go away and leave him. So even when I was with him, he
would watch me with a restless look in his eyes. He had me very little
to himself, and therefore his desire to be with me was always painfully
eager. When I went each day to the river, he used to fret and stretch
out his little arms to be taken with me. But the bathing ghal was my
place for meeting my friends, and I did not care to burden myself with
the child.

"It was an early morning in August. Fold after fold of grey clouds had
wrapped the mid-day round with a wet clinging robe. I asked the maid to
take care of the boy, while I went down to the river. The child cried
after me as I went away.

"There was no one there at the bathing ghat when I arrived. As a
swimmer, I was the best among all the village women. The river was
quite full with the rains. I swam out into the middle of the stream some
distance from the shore.

"Then I heard a cry from the bank, 'Mother!' I turned my head and saw
my boy coming down the steps, calling me as he came. I shouted to him
to stop, but he went on, laughing and calling. My feet and hands became
cramped with fear. I shut my eyes, afraid to see. When I opened
them, there, at the slippery stairs, my boy's ripple of laughter had
disappeared for ever.

"I got back to the shore. I raised him from the water. I took him in my
arms, my boy, my darling, who had begged so often in vain for me to
take him. I took him now, but he no more looked in my eyes and called
'Mother.'

"My child-God had come. I had ever neglected Him. I had ever made Him
cry. And now all that neglect began to beat against my own heart, blow
upon blow, blow upon blow. When my boy was with me, I had left him
alone. I had refused to take him with me. And now, when he is dead, his
memory clings to me and never leaves me.

"God alone knows all that my husband suffered. If he had only punished
me for my sin, it would have been better for us both. But he knew only
how to endure in silence, not how to speak.

"When I was almost mad with grief, Guru Thakur came back. In earlier
days, the relation between him and my husband had been that of boyish
friendship. Now, my husband's reverence for his sanctity and learning
was unbounded. He could hardly speak in his presence, his awe of him was
so great.

"My husband asked his Guru to try to give me some consolation. Guru
Thakur began to read and explain to me the scriptures. But I do not
think they had much effect on my mind. All their value for me lay in the
voice that uttered them. God makes the draught of divine life deepest
in the heart for man to drink, through the human voice. He has no better
vessel in His hand than that; and He Himself drinks His divine draught
out of the same vessel.

"My husband's love and veneration for his Guru filled our house, as
incense fills a temple shrine. I showed that veneration, and had peace.
I saw my God in the form of that Guru. He used to come to take his meal
at our house every morning. The first thought that would come to my mind
on waking from sleep was that of his food as a sacred gift from God.
When I prepared the things for his meal, my fingers would sing for joy.

"When my husband saw my devotion to his Guru, his respect for me greatly
increased. He noticed his Guru's eager desire to explain the scriptures
to me. He used to think that he could never expect to earn any regard
from his Guru himself, on account of his stupidity; but his wife had
made up for it.

"Thus another five years went by happily, and my whole life would have
passed like that; but beneath the surface some stealing was going on
somewhere in secret. I could not detect it; but it was detected by the
God of my heart. Then came a day when, in a moment our whole life was
turned upside down.

"It was a morning in midsummer. I was returning home from bathing, my
clothes all wet, down a shady lane. At the bend of the road, under the
mango tree, I met my Guru Thakur. He had his towel on his shoulder and
was repeating some Sanskrit verses as he was going to take his bath.
With my wet clothes clinging all about me I was ashamed to meet him. I
tried to pass by quickly, and avoid being seen. He called me by my name.

"I stopped, lowering my eyes, shrinking into myself. He fixed his gaze
upon me, and said: 'How beautiful is your body!'

"All the universe of birds seemed to break into song in the branches
overhead. All the bushes in the lane seemed ablaze with flowers. It
was as though the earth and sky and everything had become a riot of
intoxicating joy.

"I cannot tell how I got home. I only remember that I rushed into the
room where we worship God. But the room seemed empty. Only before my
eyes those same gold spangles of light were dancing which had quivered
in front of me in that shady lane on my way back from the river.

"Guru Thakur came to take his food that day, and asked my husband where
I had gone. He searched for me, but could not find me anywhere.

"Ah! I have not the same earth now any longer. The same sunlight is not
mine. I called on my God in my dismay, and He kept His face turned away
from me.

"The day passed, I know not how. That night I had to meet my husband.
But the night is dark and silent. It is the time when my husband's mind
comes out shining, like stars at twilight. I had heard him speak things
in the dark, and I had been surprised to find how deeply he understood.

"Sometimes I am late in the evening in going to rest on account of
household work. My husband waits for me, seated on the floor, without
going to bed. Our talk at such times had often begun with something
about our Guru.

"That night, when it was past midnight, I came to my room, and found my
husband sleeping on the floor. Without disturbing him I lay down on the
ground at his feet, my head towards him. Once he stretched his feet,
while sleeping, and struck me on the breast. That was his last bequest.

"Next morning, when my husband woke up from his sleep, I was already
sitting by him. Outside the window, over the thick foliage of the
jack-fruit tree, appeared the first pale red of the dawn at the fringe
of the night. It was so early that the crows had not yet begun to call.

"I bowed, and touched my husband's feet with my forehead. He sat up,
starting as if waking from a dream, and looked at my face in amazement.
I said:

"'I have made up my mind. I must leave the world. I cannot belong to
you any longer. I must leave your home.'

"Perhaps my husband thought that he was still dreaming. He said not a
word.

"'Ah! do hear me!' I pleaded with infinite pain. 'Do hear me and
understand! You must marry another wife. I must take my leave.'

"My husband said: 'What is all this wild, mad talk? Who advises you to
leave the world?'

"I said: 'My Guru Thakur.'

"My husband looked bewildered. 'Guru Thakur!' he cried. 'When did he
give you this advice?'

"'In the morning,' I answered, 'yesterday, when I met him on my way back
from the river.'

"His voice trembled a little. He turned, and looked in my face, and
asked me: 'Why did he give you such a behest?'

"'I do not know,' I answered. 'Ask him! He will tell you himself, if he
can.'

"My husband said: 'It is possible to leave the world, even when
continuing to live in it. You need not leave my home. I will speak to my
Guru about it.'

"'Your Guru,' I said, 'may accept your petition; but my heart will
never give its consent. I must leave your home. From henceforth, the
world is no more to me.'

"My husband remained silent, and we sat there on the floor in the dark.
When it was light, he said to me: 'Let us both come to him.'

"I folded my hands and said: 'I shall never meet him again.'

"He looked into my face. I lowered my eyes. He said no more. I knew
that, somehow, he had seen into my mind, and understood what was there.
In this world of mine, there were only two who loved me best--my boy
and my husband. That love was my God, and therefore it could brook no
falsehood. One of these two left me, and I left the other. Now I must
have truth, and truth alone."

She touched the ground at my feet, rose and bowed to me, and departed.





VISION

I

When I was a very young wife, I gave birth to a dead child, and came
near to death myself. I recovered strength very slowly, and my eyesight
became weaker and weaker.

My husband at this time was studying medicine. He was not altogether
sorry to have a chance of testing his medical knowledge on me. So he
began to treat my eyes himself.

My elder brother was reading for his law examination. One day he came to
see me, and was alarmed at my condition.

"What are you doing?" he said to my husband. "You are ruining Kumo's
eyes. You ought to consult a good doctor at once."

My husband said irritably: "Why! what can a good doctor do more than I
am doing? The case is quite a simple one, and the remedies are all well
known."

Dada answered with scorn: "I suppose you think there is no difference
between you and a Professor in your own Medical College."

My husband replied angrily: "If you ever get married, and there is a
dispute about your wife's property, you won't take my advice about Law.
Why, then, do you now come advising me about Medicine?"

While they were quarrelling, I was saying to myself that it was always
the poor grass that suffered most when two kings went to war. Here was a
dispute going on between these two, and I had to bear the brunt of it.

It also seemed to me very unfair that, when my family had given me in
marriage, they should interfere afterwards. After all, my pleasure and
pain are my husband's concern, not theirs.

From that day forward, merely over this trifling matter of my eyes, the
bond between my husband and Dada was strained.

To my surprise one afternoon, while my husband was away, Dada brought
a doctor in to see me. He examined my eyes very carefully, and looked
grave. He said that further neglect would be dangerous. He wrote out a
prescription, and Dada for the medicine at once. When the strange doctor
had gone, I implored my Dada not to interfere. I was sure that only evil
would come from the stealthy visits of a doctor.

I was surprised at myself for plucking up courage speak to my brother
like that. I had always hitherto been afraid of him. I am sure also that
Dada was surprised at my boldness. He kept silence for a while, and then
said to me: "Very well, Kumo. I won't call in the doctor any more. But
when the medicine comes you must take it."

Dada then went away. The medicine came from chemist. I took it--bottles,
powders, prescriptions and all--and threw it down the well!

My husband had been irritated by Dada's interference, and he began to
treat my eyes with greater diligence than ever. He tried all sorts of
remedies. I bandaged my eyes as he told me, I wore his coloured glasses,
I put in his drops, I took all his powders. I even drank the cod-liver
oil he gave me, though my gorge rose against it.

Each time he came back from the hospital, he would ask me anxiously how
I felt; and I would answer: "Oh! much better." Indeed I became an expert
in self-delusion. When I found that the water in my eyes was still
increasing, I would console myself with the thought that it was a good
thing to get rid of so much bad fluid; and, when the flow of water in my
eyes decreased, I was elated at my husband's skill.

But after a while the agony became unbearable. My eyesight faded away,
and I had continual headaches day and night. I saw how much alarmed
my husband was getting. I gathered from his manner that he was casting
about for a pretext to call in a doctor. So I hinted that it might be as
well to call one in.

That he was greatly relieved, I could see. He called in an English
doctor that very day. I do not know what talk they had together, but I
gathered that the Sahib had spoken very sharply to my husband.

He remained silent for some time after the doctor had gone. I took
his hands in mine, and said: "What an ill-mannered brute that was! Why
didn't you call in an Indian doctor? That would have been much better.
Do you think that man knows better than you do about my eyes?"

My husband was very silent for a moment, and then said with a broken
voice: "Kumo, your eyes must be operated on."

I pretended to be vexed with him for concealing the fact from me so
long.

"Here you have known this all the time," said I, "and yet you have said
nothing about it! Do you think I am such a baby as to be afraid of an
operation?"

At that he regained his good spirits: "There are very few men," said
he, "who are heroic enough to look forward to an operation without
shrinking."

I laughed at him: "Yes, that is so. Men are heroic only before their
wives!"

He looked at me gravely, and said: "You are perfectly right. We men are
dreadfully vain."

I laughed away his seriousness: "Are you sure you can beat us women even
in vanity?"

When Dada came, I took him aside: "Dada, that treatment your doctor
recommended would have done me a world of good; only unfortunately.
I mistook the mixture for the lotion. And since the day I made the
mistake, my eyes have grown steadily worse; and now an operation is
needed."

Dada said to me: "You were under your husband's treatment, and that is
why I gave up coming to visit you."

"No," I answered. "In reality, I was secretly treating myself in
accordance with your doctor's directions."

Oh! what lies we women have to tell! When we are mothers, we tell lies
to pacify our children; and when we are wives, we tell lies to pacify
the fathers of our children. We are never free from this necessity.

My deception had the effect of bringing about a better feeling between
my husband and Dada. Dada blamed himself for asking me to keep a secret
from my husband: and my husband regretted that he had not taken my
brother's advice at the first.

At last, with the consent of both, an English doctor came, and operated
on my left eye. That eye, however, was too weak to bear the strain;
and the last flickering glimmer of light went out. Then the other eye
gradually lost itself in darkness.

One day my husband came to my bedside. "I cannot brazen it out before
you any longer," said he, "Kumo, it is I who have ruined your eyes."

I felt that his voice was choking with tears, and so I took up his right
hand in both of mine and said: "Why! you did exactly what was right. You
have dealt only with that which was your very own. Just imagine, if some
strange doctor had come and taken away my eyesight. What consolation
should I have had then? But now I can feel that all has happened for the
best; and my great comfort is to know that it is at your hands I have
lost my eyes. When Ramchandra found one lotus too few with which to
worship God, he offered both his eyes in place of the lotus. And I hate
dedicated my eyes to my God. From now, whenever you see something that
is a joy to you, then you must describe it to me; and I will feed upon
your words as a sacred gift left over from your vision."

I do not mean, of course, that I said all this there and then, for it is
impossible to speak these things an the spur of the moment. But I used
to think over words like these for days and days together. And when I
was very depressed, or if at any time the light of my devotion became
dim, and I pitied my evil fate, then I made my mind utter these
sentences, one by one, as a child repeats a story that is told. And so I
could breathe once more the serener air of peace and love.

At the very time of our talk together, I said enough to show my husband
what was in my heart.

"Kumo," he said to me, "the mischief I have done by my folly can never
be made good. But I can do one thing. I can ever remain by your side,
and try to make up for your want of vision as much as is in my power."

"No," said I. "That will never do. I shall not ask you to turn your
house into an hospital for the blind. There is only one thing to be
done, you must marry again."

As I tried to explain to him that this was necessary, my voice broke
a little. I coughed, and tried to hide my emotion, but he burst out
saying:

"Kumo, I know I am a fool, and a braggart, and all that, but I am not a
villain! If ever I marry again, I swear to you--I swear to you the most
solemn oath by my family god, Gopinath--may that most hated of all sins,
the sin of parricide, fall on my head!"

Ah! I should never, never have allowed him to swear that dreadful
oath. But tears were choking my voice, and I could not say a word for
insufferable joy. I hid my blind face in my pillows, and sobbed, and
sobbed again. At last, when the first flood of my tears was over, I drew
his head down to my breast.

"Ah!" said I, "why did you take such a terrible oath? Do you think
I asked you to marry again for your own sordid pleasure? No! I was
thinking of myself, for she could perform those services which were mine
to give you when I had my sight."

"Services!" said he, "services! Those can be done by servants. Do you
think I am mad enough to bring a slave into my house, and bid her share
the throne with this my Goddess?"

As he said the word "Goddess," he held up my face in his hands, and
placed a kiss between my brows. At that moment the third eye of divine
wisdom was opened, where he kissed me, and verily I had a consecration.

I said in my own mind: "It is well. I am no longer able to serve him in
the lower world of household cares. But I shall rise to a higher
region. I shall bring down blessings from above. No more lies! No more
deceptions for me! All the littlenesses and hypocrisies of my former
life shall be banished for ever!"

That day, the whole day through, I felt a conflict going on within me.
The joy of the thought, that after this solemn oath it was impossible
for my husband to marry again, fixed its roots deep in my heart, and
I could not tear them out. But the new Goddess, who had taken her new
throne in me, said: "The time might come when it would be good for
your husband to break his oath and marry again." But the woman, who was
within me, said: "That may be; but all the same an oath is an oath, and
there is no way out." The Goddess, who was within me, answered: "That is
no reason why you should exult over it." But the woman, who was within
me, replied: "What you say is quite true, no doubt; all the same he has
taken his oath." And the same story went on again and again. At last
the Goddess frowned in silence, and the darkness of a horrible fear came
down upon me.

My repentant husband would not let the servants do my work; he must do
it all himself. At first it gave me unbounded delight to be dependent
on him thus for every little thing. It was a means of keeping him by
my side, and my desire to have him with me had become intense since my
blindness. That share of his presence, which my eyes had lost, my other
senses craved. When he was absent from my side, I would feel as if I
were hanging in mid-air, and had lost my hold of all things tangible.

Formerly, when my husband came back late from the hospital, I used
to open my window and gaze at the road. That road was the link which
connected his world with mine. Now when I had lost that link through my
blindness, all my body would go out to seek him. The bridge that united
us had given way, and there was now this unsurpassable chasm. When he
left my side the gulf seemed to yawn wide open. I could only wait for
the time when he should cross back again from his own shore to mine.

But such intense longing and such utter dependence can never be good.
A wife is a burden enough to a man, in all conscience, and to add to it
the burden of this blindness was to make his life unbearable. I vowed
that I would suffer alone, and never wrap my husband round in the folds
of my all-pervading darkness.

Within an incredibly short space of time I managed to train myself to
do all my household duties by the help of touch and sound and smell. In
fact I soon found that I could get on with greater skill than before.
For sight often distracts rather than helps us. And so it came to pass
that, when these roving eyes of mine could do their work no longer,
all the other senses took up their several duties with quietude and
completeness.

When I had gained experience by constant practice, I would not let my
husband do any more household duties for me. He complained bitterly at
first that I was depriving him of his penance.

This did not convince me. Whatever he might say, I could feel that he
had a real sense of relief when these household duties were over. To
serve daily a wife who is blind can never make up the life of a man.

II

My husband at last had finished his medical course. He went away from
Calcutta to a small town to practise as a doctor. There in the country I
felt with joy, through all my blindness, that I was restored to the arms
of my mother. I had left my village birthplace for Calcutta when I was
eight years old. Since then ten years had passed away, and in the great
city the memory of my village home had grown dim. As long as I had
eyesight, Calcutta with its busy life screened from view the memory of
my early days. But when I lost my eyesight I knew for the first time
that Calcutta allured only the eyes: it could not fill the mind. And
now, in my blindness, the scenes of my childhood shone out once more,
like stars that appear one by one in the evening sky at the end of the
day.

It was the beginning of November when we left Calcutta for Harsingpur.
The place was new to me, but the scents and sounds of the countryside
pressed round and embraced me. The morning breeze coming fresh from
the newly ploughed land, the sweet and tender smell of the flowering
mustard, the shepherd-boy's flute sounding in the distance, even the
creaking noise of the bullock-cart, as it groaned over the broken
village road, filled my world with delight. The memory of my past life,
with all its ineffable fragrance and sound, became a living present to
me, and my blind eyes could not tell me I was wrong. I went back, and
lived over again my childhood. Only one thing was absent: my mother was
not with me.

I could see my home with the large peepul trees growing along the edge
of the village pool. I could picture in my mind's eye my old grandmother
seated on the ground with her thin wisps of hair untied, warming her
back in the sun as she made the little round lentil balls to be dried
and used for cooking. But somehow I could not recall the songs she used
to croon to herself in her weak and quavering voice. In the evening,
whenever I heard the lowing of cattle, I could almost watch the figure
of my mother going round the sheds with lighted lamp in her hand. The
smell of the wet fodder and the pungent smoke of the straw fire would
enter into my very heart. And in the distance I seemed to hear the
clanging of the temple bell wafted up by the breeze from the river bank.

Calcutta, with all its turmoil and gossip, curdles the heart. There,
all the beautiful duties of life lose their freshness and innocence. I
remember one day, when a friend of mine came in, and said to me: "Kumo,
why don't you feel angry? If I had been treated like you by my husband,
I would never look upon his face again."

She tried to make me indignant, because he had been so long calling in a
doctor.

"My blindness," said I, "was itself a sufficient evil. Why should I make
it worse by allowing hatred to grow up against my husband?"

My friend shook her head in great contempt, when she heard such
old-fashioned talk from the lips of a mere chit of a girl. She went away
in disdain. But whatever might be my answer at the time, such words as
these left their poison; and the venom was never wholly got out of the
soul, when once they had been uttered.

So you see Calcutta, with its never-ending gossip, does harden the
heart. But when I came back to the country all my earlier hopes and
faiths, all that I held true in life during childhood, became fresh and
bright once more. God came to me, and filled my heart and my world. I
bowed to Him, and said:

"It is well that Thou has taken away my eyes. Thou art with me."

Ah! But I said more than was right. It was a presumption to say: "Thou
art with me." All we can say is this: "I must be true to Thee." Even
when nothing is left for us, still we have to go on living.

III

We passed a few happy months together. My husband gained some reputation
in his profession as a doctor. And money came with it.

But there is a mischief in money. I cannot point to any one event; but,
because the blind have keener perceptions than other people, I could
discern the change which came over my husband along with the increase of
wealth.

He had a keen sense of justice when he was younger, and had often told
me of his great desire to help the poor when once he obtained a practice
of his own. He had a noble contempt far those in his profession who
would not feel the pulse of a poor patient before collecting his fee.
But now I noticed a difference. He had become strangely hard. Once when
a poor woman came, and begged him, out of charity, to save the life of
her only child, he bluntly refused. And when I implored him myself to
help her, he did his work perfunctorily.

While we were less rich my husband disliked sharp practice in money
matters. He was scrupulously honourable in such things. But since he
had got a large account at the bank he was often closeted for hours with
some scamp of a landlord's agent, for purposes which clearly boded no
good.

Where has he drifted? What has become of this husband of mine,--the
husband I knew before I was blind; the husband who kissed me that day
between my brows, and enshrined me on the throne of a Goddess? Those
whom a sudden gust of passion brings down to the dust can rise up again
with a new strong impulse of goodness. But those who, day by day, become
dried up in the very fibre of their moral being; those who by some outer
parasitic growth choke the inner life by slow degrees,--such wench one
day a deadness which knows no healing.

The separation caused by blindness is the merest physical trifle. But,
ah! it suffocates me to find that he is no longer with me, where he
stood with me in that hour when we both knew that I was blind. That is a
separation indeed!

I, with my love fresh and my faith unbroken, have kept to the shelter of
my heart's inner shrine. But my husband has left the cool shade of those
things that are ageless and unfading. He is fast disappearing into the
barren, waterless waste in his mad thirst for gold.

Sometimes the suspicion comes to me that things not so bad as they seem:
that perhaps I exaggerate because I am blind. It may be that, if my
eyesight were unimpaired, I should have accepted world as I found it.
This, at any rate, was the light in which my husband looked at all my
moods and fancies.

One day an old Musalman came to the house. He asked my husband to visit
his little grand-daughter. I could hear the old man say: "Baba, I am
a poor man; but come with me, and Allah will do you good." My husband
answered coldly: "What Allah will do won't help matters; I want to know
what you can do for me."

When I heard it, I wondered in my mind why God had not made me deaf as
well as blind. The old man heaved a deep sigh, and departed. I sent
my maid to fetch him to my room. I met him at the door of the inner
apartment, and put some money into his hand.

"Please take this from me," said I, "for your little grand-daughter, and
get a trustworthy doctor to look after her. And-pray for my husband."

But the whole of that day I could take no food at all. In the afternoon,
when my husband got up from sleep, he asked me: "Why do you look so
pale?"

I was about to say, as I used to do in the past: "Oh! It's nothing ";
but those days of deception were over, and I spoke to him plainly.

"I have been hesitating," I said, "for days together to tell you
something. It has been hard to think out what exactly it was I wanted to
say. Even now I may not be able to explain what I had in my mind. But I
am sure you know what has happened. Our lives have drifted apart."

My husband laughed in a forced manner, and said: "Change is the law of
nature."

I said to him: "I know that. But there are some things that are
eternal."

Then he became serious.

"There are many women," said he, "who have a real cause for sorrow.
There are some whose husbands do not earn money. There are others whose
husbands do not love them. But you are making yourself wretched about
nothing at all."

Then it became clear to me that my very blindness had conferred on me
the power of seeing a world which is beyond all change. Yes! It is true.
I am not like other women. And my husband will never understand me.

IV

Our two lives went on with their dull routine for some time. Then there
was a break in the monotony. An aunt of my husband came to pay us a
visit.

The first thing she blurted out after our first greeting was this:
"Well, Krum, it's a great pity you have become blind; but why do you
impose your own affliction on your husband? You must get him to another
wife."

There was an awkward pause. If my husband had only said something in
jest, or laughed in her face, all would have been over. But he stammered
and hesitated, and said at last in a nervous, stupid way: "Do you really
think so? Really, Aunt, you shouldn't talk like that."

His aunt appealed to me. "Was I wrong, Kumo?"

I laughed a hollow laugh.

"Had not you better," said I, "consult some one more competent to
decide? The pickpocket never asks permission from the man whose pocket
he is going to pick."

"You are quite right," she replied blandly. "Abinash, my dear, let us
have our little conference in private. What do you say to that?"

After a few days my husband asked her, in my presence, if she knew of
any girl of a decent family who could come and help me in my household
work. He knew quite well that I needed no help. I kept silence.

"Oh! there are heaps of them," replied his aunt. "My cousin has a
daughter who is just of the marriageable age, and as nice a girl as
you could wish. Her people would be only too glad to secure you as a
husband."

Again there came from him that forced, hesitating laugh, and he said:
"But I never mentioned marriage."

"How could you expect," asked his aunt, "a girl of decent family to come
and live in your house without marriage?"

He had to admit that this was reasonable, and remained nervously silent.

I stood alone within the closed doors of my blindness after he had gone,
and called upon my God and prayed: "O God, save my husband."

When I was coming out of the household shrine from my morning worship a
few days later, his aunt took hold of both my hands warmly.

"Kumo, here is the girl," said she, "we were speaking about the other
day. Her name is Hemangini. She will be delighted to meet you. Hemo,
come here and be introduced to your sister."

My husband entered the room at the same moment. He feigned surprise when
he saw the strange girl, and was about to retire. But his aunt said:
"Abinash, my dear, what are you running away for? There is no need to
do that. Here is my cousin's daughter, Hemangini, come to see you. Hemo,
make your bow to him."

As if taken quite by surprise, he began to ply his aunt with questions
about the when and why and how of the new arrival.

I saw the hollowness of the whole thing, and took Hemangini by the hand
and led her to my own room. I gently stroked her face and arms and hair,
and found that she was about fifteen years old, and very beautiful.

As I felt her face, she suddenly burst out laughing and said: "Why! what
are you doing? Are you hypnotising me?"

That sweet ringing laughter of hers swept away in a moment all the dark
clouds that stood between us. I threw my right arm about her neck.

"Dear one," said I, "I am trying to see you." And again I stroked her
soft face with my left hand.

"Trying to see me?" she said, with a new burst of laughter. "Am I like
a vegetable marrow, grown in your garden, that you want to feel me all
round to see how soft I am?"

I suddenly bethought me that she did not know I had lost my sight.

"Sister, I am blind," said I.

She was silent. I could feel her big young eyes, full of curiosity,
peering into my face. I knew they were full of pity. Then she grew
thoughtful and puzzled, and said, after a short pause:

"Oh! I see now. That was the reason your husband invited his aunt to
come and stay here."

"No!" I replied, "you are quite mistaken. He did not ask her to come.
She came of her own accord."

Hemangini went off into a peal of laughter. "That's just like my aunt,"
said she. "Oh I wasn't it nice of her to come without any invitation?
But now she's come, you won't get her to move for some time, I can
assure you!"

Then she paused, and looked puzzled.

"But why did father send me?" she asked. "Can you tell me that?"

The aunt had come into the room while we were talking. Hemangini said to
her: "When are you thinking of going back, Aunt?"

The aunt looked very much upset.

"What a question to ask!" said she, "I've never seen such a restless
body as you. We've only just come, and you ask when we're going back!"

"It is all very well for you," Hemangini said, "for this house belongs
to your near relations. But what about me? I tell you plainly I can't
stop here." And then she held my hand and said: "What do you think,
dear?"

I drew her to my heart, but said nothing. The aunt was in a great
difficulty. She felt the situation was getting beyond her control; so
she proposed that she and her niece should go out together to bathe.

"No! we two will go together," said Hemangini, clinging to me. The aunt
gave in, fearing opposition if she tried to drag her away.

Going down to the river Hemangini asked me: "Why don't you have
children?"

I was startled by her question, and answered: "How can I tell? My God
has not given me any. That is the reason."

"No! That's not the reason," said Hemangini quickly. "You must have
committed some sin. Look at my aunt. She is childless. It must be
because her heart has some wickedness. But what wickedness is in your
heart?"

The words hurt me. I have no solution to offer for the problem of evil.
I sighed deeply, and said in the silence of my soul: "My God! Thou
knowest the reason."

"Gracious goodness," cried Hemangini, "what are you sighing for? No one
ever takes me seriously."

And her laughter pealed across the river.

V

I found out after this that there were constant interruptions in my
husband's professional duties. He refused all calls from a distance, and
would hurry away from his patients, even when they were close at hand.

Formerly it was only during the mid-day meals and at night-time that he
could come into the inner apartment. But now, with unnecessary anxiety
for his aunt's comfort, he began to visit her at all hours of the day. I
knew at once that he had come to her room, when I heard her shouting for
Hemangini to bring in a glass of water. At first the girl would do what
she was told; but later on she refused altogether.

Then the aunt would call, in an endearing voice: "Hemo! Hemo!
Hemangini." But the girl would cling to me with an impulse of pity. A
sense of dread and sadness would keep her silent. Sometimes she would
shrink towards me like a hunted thing, who scarcely knew what was
coming.

About this time my brother came down from Calcutta to visit me. I knew
how keen his powers of observation were, and what a hard judge he was.
I feared my husband would be put on his defence, and have to stand his
trial before him. So I endeavoured to hide the true situation behind a
mask of noisy cheerfulness. But I am afraid I overdid the part: it was
unnatural for me.

My husband began to fidget openly, and asked how long my brother was
going to stay. At last his impatience became little short of insulting,
and my brother had no help for it but to leave. Before going he placed
his hand on my head, and kept it there for some time. I noticed that his
hand shook, and a tear fell from his eyes, as he silently gave me his
blessing.

I well remember that it was an evening in April, and a market-day.
People who had come into the town were going back home from market.
There was the feeling of an impending storm in the air; the smell of the
wet earth and the moisture in the wind were all-pervading. I never keep
a lighted lamp in my bedroom, when I am alone, lest my clothes should
catch fire, or some accident happen. I sat on the floor in my dark room,
and called upon the God of my blind world.

"O my Lord," I cried, "Thy face is hidden. I cannot see. I am blind. I
hold tight this broken rudder of a heart till my hands bleed. The waves
have become too strong for me. How long wilt thou try me, my God, how
long?"

I kept my head prone upon the bedstead and began to sob. As I did so,
I felt the bedstead move a little. The next moment Hemangini was by my
side. She clung to my neck, and wiped my tears away silently. I do not
know why she had been waiting that evening in the inner room, or why she
had been lying alone there in the dusk. She asked me no question. She
said no word. She simply placed her cool hand on my forehead, and kissed
me, and departed.

The next morning Hemangini said to her aunt in my presence: "If you want
to stay on, you can. But I don't. I'm going away home with our family
servant."

The aunt said there was no need for her to go alone, for she was going
away also. Then smilingly and mincingly she brought out, from a plush
case, a ring set with pearls.

"Look, Hemo," said she, "what a beautiful ring my Abinash brought for
you."

Hemangini snatched the ring from her hand.

"Look, Aunt," she answered quickly, "just see how splendidly I aim." And
she flung the ring into the tank outside the window.

The aunt, overwhelmed with alarm, vexation, and surprise, bristled like
a hedgehog. She turned to me, and held me by the hand.

"Kumo," she repeated again and again, "don't say a word about this
childish freak to Abinash. He would be fearfully vexed."

I assured her that she need not fear. Not a word would reach him about
it from my lips.

The next day before starting for home Hemangini embraced me, and said:
"Dearest, keep me in mind; do not forget me."

I stroked her face over and over with my fingers, and said: "Sister, the
blind have long memories."

I drew her head towards me, and kissed her hair and her forehead. My
world suddenly became grey. All the beauty and laughter and tender
youth, which had nestled so close to me, vanished when Hemangini
departed. I went groping about with arms outstretched, seeking to find
out what was left in my deserted world.

My husband came in later. He affected a great relief now that they were
gone, but it was exaggerated and empty. He pretended that his aunt's
visit had kept him away from work.

Hitherto there had been only the one barrier of blindness between me
and my husband. Now another barrier was added,--this deliberate silence
about Hemangini. He feigned utter indifference, but I knew he was having
letters about her.

It was early in May. My maid entered my room one morning, and asked
me: "What is all this preparation going on at the landing on the river?
Where is Master going?"

I knew there was something impending, but I said to the maid: "I can't
say."

The maid did not dare to ask me any more questions. She sighed, and went
away.

Late that night my husband came to me.

"I have to visit a patient in the country," said he. "I shall have to
start very early to-morrow morning, and I may have to be away for two or
three days."

I got up from my bed. I stood before him, and cried aloud: "Why are you
telling me lies?"

My husband stammered out: "What--what lies have I told you?"

I said: "You are going to get married."

He remained silent. For some moments there was no sound in the room.
Then I broke the silence:

"Answer me," I cried. "Say, yes."

He answered, "Yes," like a feeble echo.

I shouted out with a loud voice: "No! I shall never allow you. I shall
save you from this great disaster, this dreadful sin. If I fail in this,
then why am I your wife, and why did I ever worship my God?"

The room remained still as a stone. I dropped on the floor, and clung to
my husband's knees.

"What have I done?" I asked. "Where have I been lacking? Tell me truly.
Why do you want another wife?"

My husband said slowly: "I will tell you the truth. I am afraid of
you. Your blindness has enclosed you in its fortress, and I have now no
entrance. To me you are no longer a woman. You are awful as my God. I
cannot live my every day life with you. I want a woman--just an ordinary
woman--whom I can be free to chide and coax and pet and scold."

Oh, tear open my heart and see! What am I else but that,--just an
ordinary woman? I am the same girl that I was when I was newly wed, a
girl with all her need to believe, to confide, to worship.

I do not recollect exactly the words that I uttered. I only remember
that I said: "If I be a true wife, then, may God be my witness, you
shall never do this wicked deed, you shall never break your oath. Before
you commit such sacrilege, either I shall become a widow, or Hemangini
shall die."

Then I fell down on the floor in a swoon. When I came to myself, it was
still dark. The birds were silent. My husband had gone.

All that day I sat at my worship in the sanctuary at the household
shrine. In the evening a fierce storm, with thunder and lightning and
rain, swept down upon the house and shook it. As I crouched before the
shrine, I did not ask my God to save my husband from the storm, though
he must have been at that time in peril on the river. I prayed that
whatever might happen to me, my husband might be saved from this great
sin.

Night passed. The whole of the next day I kept my seat at worship. When
it was evening there was the noise of shaking and beating at the door.
When the door was broken open, they found me lying unconscious on the
ground, and carried me to my room.

When I came to myself at last, I heard some one whispering in my ear:
"Sister."

I found that I was lying in my room with my head on Hemangini's lap.
When my head moved, I heard her dress rustle. It was the sound of bridal
silk.

O my God, my God! My prayer has gone unheeded! My husband has fallen!

Hemangini bent her head low, and said in a sweet whisper: "Sister,
dearest, I have come to ask your blessing on our marriage."

At first my whole body stiffened like the trunk of a tree that has been
struck by lightning. Then I sat up, and said, painfully, forcing myself
to speak the words: "Why should I not bless you? You have done no
wrong."

Hemangini laughed her merry laugh.

"Wrong!" said she. "When you married it was right; and when I marry, you
call it wrong!"

I tried to smile in answer to her laughter. I said in my mind: "My
prayer is not the final thing in this world. His will is all. Let the
blows descend upon my head; but may they leave my faith and hope in God
untouched."

Hemangini bowed to me, and touched my feet. "May you be happy," said I,
blessing her, "and enjoy unbroken prosperity."

Hemangini was still unsatisfied.

"Dearest sister," she said, "a blessing for me is not enough. You must
make our happiness complete. You must, with those saintly hands of
yours, accept into your home my husband also. Let me bring him to you."

I said: "Yes, bring him to me."

A few moments later I heard a familiar footstep, and the question,
"Kumo, how are you?"

I started up, and bowed to the ground, and cried: "Dada!"

Hemangini burst out laughing.

"You still call him elder brother?" she asked. "What nonsense! Call him
younger brother now, and pull his ears and cease him, for he has married
me, your younger sister."

Then I understood. My husband had been saved from that great sin. He had
not fallen.

I knew my Dada had determined never to marry. And, since my mother had
died, there was no sacred wish of hers to implore him to wedlock. But I,
his sister, by my sore need bad brought it to pass. He had married for
my sake.

Tears of joy gushed from my eyes, and poured down my cheeks. I tried,
but I could not stop them. Dada slowly passed his fingers through my
hair. Hemangini clung to me, and went on laughing.

I was lying awake in my bed for the best part of the night, waiting with
straining anxiety for my husband's return. I could not imagine how he
would bear the shock of shame and disappointment.

When it was long past the hour of midnight, slowly my door opened. I sat
up on my bed, and listened. They were the footsteps of my husband. My
heart began to beat wildly. He came up to my bed, held my band in his.

"Your Dada," said he, "has saved me from destruction. I was being
dragged down and down by a moments madness. An infatuation had seized
me, from which I seemed unable to escape. God alone knows what a load I
was carrying on that day when I entered the boat. The storm came down
on river, and covered the sky. In the midst of all fears I had a secret
wish in my heart to be drowned, and so disentangle my life from the knot
which I had tied it. I reached Mathurganj. There I heard the news which
set me free. Your brother had married Hemangini. I cannot tell you with
what joy and shame I heard it. I hastened on board the boat again. In
that moment of self-revelation I knew that I could have no happiness
except with you. You are a Goddess."

I laughed and cried at the same time, and said: "No, no, no! I am not
going to be a Goddess any longer I am simply your own little wife. I am
an ordinary woman."

"Dearest," he replied, "I have also something I want to say to you.
Never again put me to shame by calling me your God."

On the next day the little town became joyous with sound of conch
shells. But nobody made any reference to that night of madness, when all
was so nearly lost.




THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE

I

Once upon a time the Babus of Nayanjore were famous landholders. They
were noted for their princely extravagance. They would tear off the
rough border of their Dacca muslin, because it rubbed against their
skin. They could spend many thousands of rupees over the wedding of a
kitten. On a certain grand occasion it is alleged that in order to turn
night into day they lighted numberless lamps and showered silver threads
from the sky to imitate sunlight. Those were the days before the flood.
The flood came. The line of succession among these old-world Babus, with
their lordly habits, could not continue for long. Like a lamp with too
many wicks burning, the oil flared away quickly, and the light went out.

Kailas Babu, our neighbour, is the last relic of this extinct
magnificence. Before he grew up, his family had very nearly reached its
lowest ebb. When his father died, there was one dazzling outburst of
funeral extravagance, and then insolvency. The property was sold to
liquidate the debt. What little ready money was left over was altogether
insufficient to keep up the past ancestral splendours.

Kailas Babu left Nayanjore, and came to Calcutta. His son did not remain
long in this world of faded glory. He died, leaving behind him an only
daughter.

In Calcutta we are Kailas Baba's neighbours. Curiously enough our own
family history is just the opposite to his. My father got his money by
his own exertions, and prided himself on never spending a penny more
than was needed. His clothes were those of a working man, and his
hands also. He never had any inclination to earn the title of Baba by
extravagant display, and I myself his only son, owe him gratitude for
that. He gave me the very best education, and I was able to make my way
in the world. I am not ashamed of the fact that I am a self-made man.
Crisp bank-notes in my safe are dearer to me than a long pedigree in an
empty family chest.

I believe this was why I disliked seeing Kailas Baba drawing his heavy
cheques on the public credit from the bankrupt bank of his ancient Babu
reputation I used to fancy that he looked down on me, because my father
had earned money with his own hands.

I ought to have noticed that no one showed any vexation towards Kailas
Babu except myself. Indeed it would have been difficult to find an
old man who did less harm than he. He was always ready with his kindly
little acts of courtesy in times of sorrow and joy. He would join in all
the ceremonies and religious observances of his neighbours. His familiar
smile would greet young and old alike. His politeness in asking details
about domestic affairs was untiring. The friends who met him in the
street were perforce ready to be button-holed, while a long string of
questions of this kind followed one another from his lips:

"My dear friend, I am delighted to see you. Are quite well? How is
Shashi? and Dada--is he all right? Do you know, I've only just heard that
Madhu's son has got fever. How is he? Have you heard? And Hari Charan
Babu--I've not seen him for a long time--I hope he is not ill. What's the
matter with Rakkhal? And, er--er, how are the ladies of your family?"

Kailas Balm was spotlessly neat in his dress on all occasions, though
his supply of clothes was sorely limited. Every day he used to air his
shirts and vests and coats and trousers carefully, and put them out in
the sun, along with his bed-quilt, his pillowcase, and the small carpet
on which he always sat. After airing them he would shake them, and brush
them, and put them on the rock. His little bits of furniture made his
small room decent, and hinted that there was more in reserve if needed.
Very often, for want of a servant, he would shut up his house for a
while. Then he would iron out his shirts and linen with his own hands,
and do other little menial tasks. After this he would open his door and
receive his friends again.

Though Kailas Balm, as I have said, had lost all his landed property,
he had still same family heirlooms left. There was a silver cruet for
sprinkling scented water, a filigree box for otto-of-roses, a small gold
salver, a costly ancient shawl, and the old-fashioned ceremonial dress
and ancestral turban. These he had rescued with the greatest difficulty
from the money-lenders' clutches. On every suitable occasion he would
bring them out in state, and thus try to save the world-famed dignity
of the Babus of Nayanjore. At heart the most modest of men, in his daily
speech he regarded it as a sacred duty, owed to his rank, to give free
play to his family pride. His friends would encourage this trait in his
character with kindly good-humour, and it gave them great amusement.

The neighbourhood soon learnt to call him their Thakur Dada
(Grandfather). They would flock to his house, and sit with him for hours
together. To prevent his incurring any expense, one or other of his
friends would bring him tobacco, and say: "Thakur Dada, this morning
some tobacco was sent to me from Gaya. Do take it, and see how you like
it."

Thakur Dada would take it, and say it was excellent. He would then go on
to tell of a certain exquisite tobacco which they once smoked in the old
days at Nayanjore at the cost of a guinea an ounce.

"I wonder," he used to say, "I wonder if any one would like to try it
now. I have some left, and can get it at once."

Every one knew, that, if they asked for it, then somehow or other the
key of the cupboard would be missing; or else Ganesh, his old family
servant, had put it away somewhere.

"You never can be sure," he would add, "where things go to when servants
are about. Now, this Ganesh of mine,--I can't tell you what a fool he
is, but I haven't the heart to dismiss him."

Ganesh, for the credit of the family, was quite ready to bear all the
blame without a word.

One of the company usually said at this point: "Never mind, Thakur Dada.
Please don't trouble to look for it. This tobacco we're smoking will do
quite well. The other would be too strong."

Then Thakur Dada would be relieved, and settle down again, and the talk
would go on.

When his guests got up to go away, Thakur Dada would accompany them to
the door, and say to them on the door-step: "Oh, by the way, when are
you all coming to dine with me?"

One or other of us would answer: "Not just yet, Thakur Dada, not just
yet. We'll fix a day later."

"Quite right," he would answer. "Quite right. We had much better wait
till the rains come. It's too hot now. And a grand rich dinner such as I
should want to give you would upset us in weather like this."

But when the rains did come, every one careful not to remind him of his
promise. If the subject was brought up, some friend would suggest
gently that it was very inconvenient to get about when the rains were so
severe, that it would be much better to wait till they were over. And so
the game went on.

His poor lodging was much too small for his position, and we used to
condole with him about it. His friends would assure him they quite
understood his difficulties: it was next to impossible to get a decent
house in Calcutta. Indeed, they had all been looking out for years for
a house to suit him, but, I need hardly add, no friend had been foolish
enough to find one. Thakur Dada used to say, after a long sigh of
resignation: "Well, well, I suppose I shall have to put up with this
house after all." Then he would add with a genial smile: "But, you know,
I could never bear to be away from my friends. I must be near you. That
really compensates for everything."

Somehow I felt all this very deeply indeed. I suppose the real reason
was, that when a man is young stupidity appears to him the worst of
crimes. Kailas Babu was not really stupid. In ordinary business matters
every one was ready to consult him.

But with regard to Nayanjore his utterances were certainly void
of common sense. Because, out of amused affection for him, no one
contradicted his impossible statements, he refused to keep them in
bounds. When people recounted in his hearing the glorious history of
Nayanjore with absurd exaggerations he would accept all they said with
the utmost gravity, and never doubted, even in his dreams, that any one
could disbelieve it.

II

When I sit down and try to analyse the thoughts and feelings that I had
towards Kailas Babu I see that there was a still deeper reason for my
dislike. I will now explain.

Though I am the son of a rich man, and might have wasted time at
college, my industry was such that I took my M.A. degree in Calcutta
University when quite young. My moral character was flawless. In
addition, my outward appearance was so handsome, that if I were to call
myself beautiful, it might be thought a mark of self-estimation, but
could not be considered an untruth.

There could be no question that among the young men of Bengal I was
regarded by parents generally as a very eligible match. I was myself
quite clear on the point, and had determined to obtain my full value in
the marriage market. When I pictured my choice, I had before my mind's
eye a wealthy father's only daughter, extremely beautiful and highly
educated. Proposals came pouring in to me from far and near; large sums
in cash were offered. I weighed these offers with rigid impartiality, in
the delicate scales of my own estimation. But there was no one fit to be
my partner. I became convinced, with the poet Bhabavuti, that

     In this worlds endless time and boundless space
     One may be born at last to match my sovereign grace.

But in this puny modern age, and this contracted space of modern Bengal,
it was doubtful if the peerless creature existed as yet.

Meanwhile my praises were sung in many tunes, and in different metres,
by designing parents.

Whether I was pleased with their daughters or not, this worship which
they offered was never unpleasing. I used to regard it as my proper due,
because I was so good. We are told that when the gods withhold their
boons from mortals they still expect their worshippers to pay them
fervent honour, and are angry if it is withheld. I had that divine
expectance strongly developed in myself.

I have already mentioned that Thakur Dada had an only grand-daughter.
I had seen her many times, but had never mistaken her for beautiful. No
thought had ever entered my mind that she would be a possible partner
for myself. All the same, it seemed quite certain to me that some day ox
other Kailas Babu would offer her, with all due worship, as an oblation
at my shrine. Indeed-this was the secret of my dislike-I was thoroughly
annoyed that he had not done it already.

I heard he had told his friends that the Babus of Nayanjore never craved
a boon. Even if the girl remained unmarried, he would not break the
family tradition. It was this arrogance of his that made me angry. My
indignation smouldered for some time. But I remained perfectly silent,
and bore it with the utmost patience, because I was so good.

As lightning accompanies thunder, so in my character a flash of
humour was mingled with the mutterings of my wrath. It was, of course,
impossible for me to punish the old man merely to give vent to my rage;
and for a long time I did nothing at all. But suddenly one day such an
amusing plan came into my head, that I could not resist the temptation
of carrying it into effect.

I have already said that many of Kailas Babu's friends used to flatter
the old man's vanity to the full. One, who was a retired Government
servant, had told him that whenever he saw the Chota Lord Sahib he
always asked for the latest news about the Babus of Nayanjore, and the
Chota Lard had been heard to say that in all Bengal the only really
respectable families were those of the Maharaja of Burdwan and the Babus
of Nayanjore. When this monstrous falsehood was told to Kailas Balm
he was extremely gratified, and often repeated the story. And wherever
after that he met this Government servant in company he would ask, along
with other questions:

"Oh! er--by the way, how is the Chota Lord Sahib? Quite well, did you
say? Ah, yes, I am so delighted to hear it I And the dear Mem Sahib, is
she quite well too? Ah, yes! and the little children-are they quite
well also? Ah, yes I that's very goad news! Be sure and give them my
compliments when you see them."

Kailas Balm would constantly express his intention of going some day and
paying a visit to the Sahib.

But it may be taken for granted that many Chota Lords and Burro Lords
also would come and go, and much water would pass down the Hoogly,
before the family coach of Nayanjore would be furnished up to pay a
visit to Government House.

One day I took Kailas Babu aside, and told him in a whisper: "Thakur
Dada, I was at the Levee yesterday, and the Chota Lord happened to
mention the Babes of Nayanjore. I told him that Kailas Balm had come to
town. Do you know, he was terribly hurt because you hadn't called. He
told me he was going to put etiquette on one side, and pay you a private
visit himself this very afternoon."

Anybody else could have seen through this plot of mine in a moment. And,
if it had been directed against another person, Kailas Balm would have
understood the joke. But after all he had heard from his friend the
Government servant, and after all his own exaggerations, a visit from
the Lieutenant-Governor seemed the most natural thing in the world. He
became highly nervous and excited at my news. Each detail of the coming
visit exercised him greatly--most of all his own ignorance of English.
How on earth was that difficulty to be met? I told him there was
no difficulty at all: it was aristocratic not to know English: and,
besides, the Lieutenant-Governor always brought an interpreter with him,
and he had expressly mentioned that this visit was to be private.

About mid-day, when most of our neighbours are at work, and the rest are
asleep, a carriage and pair stopped before the lodging of Kailas Babu.
Two flunkeys in livery came up the stairs, and announced in a loud
voice, "The Chota Lord Sahib hoe arrived." Kailas Babu was ready,
waiting for him, in his old-fashioned ceremonial robes and ancestral
turban, and Ganesh was by his side, dressed in his master's best suit
of clothes for the occasion. When the Chota Lord Sahib was announced,
Kailas Balm ran panting and puffing and trembling to the door, and led
in a friend of mine, in disguise, with repeated salaams, bowing low at
each step, and walking backward as best he could. He had his old family
shawl spread over a hard wooden chair, and he asked the Lord Sahib to
be seated. He then made a high flown speech in Urdu, the ancient Court
language of the Sahibs, and presented on the golden salver a string
of gold mohurs, the last relics of his broken fortune. The old family
servant Ganesh, with an expression of awe bordering on terror, stood
behind with the scent-sprinkler, drenching the Lord Sahib, touching him
gingerly from time to time with the otto-of-roses from the filigree box.

Kailas Babu repeatedly expressed his regret at not being able to receive
His Honour Bahadur with all the ancestral magnificence of his own family
estate at Nayanjore. There he could have welcomed him properly with due
ceremonial. But in Calcutta he was a mere stranger and sojourner-in fact
a fish out of water.

My friend, with his tall silk hat on, very gravely nodded. I need hardly
say that according to English custom the hat ought to have been removed
inside the room. But my friend did not dare to take it off for fear of
detection; and Kailas Balm and his old servant Ganesh were sublimely
unconscious of the breach of etiquette.

After a ten minutes' interview, which consisted chiefly of nodding the
head, my friend rose to his feet to depart. The two flunkeys in livery,
as had been planned beforehand, carried off in state the string of
gold mohurs, the gold salver, the old ancestral shawl, the silver
scent-sprinkler, and the otto-of-roses filigree box; they placed them
ceremoniously in the carriage. Kailas Babu regarded this as the usual
habit of Chota Lard Sahibs.

I was watching all the while from the next room. My sides were aching
with suppressed laughter. When I could hold myself in no longer, I
rushed into a further room, suddenly to discover, in a corner, a young
girl sobbing as if her heart would break. When she saw my uproarious
laughter she stood upright in passion, flashing the lightning of her big
dark eyes in mine, and said with a tear-choked voice:

"Tell me! What harm has my grandfather done to you? Why have you come to
deceive him? Why have you come here? Why--"

She could say no more. She covered her face with her hands, and broke
into sobs.

My laughter vanished in a moment. It had never occurred to me that there
was anything but a supremely funny joke in this act of mine, and here I
discovered that I had given the cruelest pain to this tenderest little
heart. All the ugliness of my cruelty rose up to condemn me. I slunk out
of the room in silence, like a kicked dog.

Hitherto I had only looked upon Kusum, the grand-daughter of Kailas
Babu, as a somewhat worthless commodity in the marriage market, waiting
in vain to attract a husband. But now I found, with a shock of surprise,
that in the corner of that room a human heart was beating.

The whole night through I had very little sleep. My mind was in a
tumult. On the next day, very early in the morning, I took all those
stolen goods back to Kailas Babe's lodgings, wishing to hand them over
in secret to the servant Ganesh. I waited outside the door, and, not
finding any one, went upstairs to Kailas Babu's room. I heard from the
passage Kusum asking her grandfather in the most winning voice: "Dada,
dearest, do tell me all that the Chota Lord Sahib said to you yesterday.
Don't leave out a single word. I am dying to hear it all over again."

And Dada needed no encouragement. His face beamed over with pride as he
related all manner of praises, which the Lard Sahib had been good enough
to utter concerning the ancient families of Nayanjore. The girl was
seated before him, looking up into his face, and listening with rapt
attention. She was determined, out of love for the old man, to play her
part to the full.

My heart was deeply touched, and tears came to my eyes. I stood there
in silence in the passage, while Thakur Dada finished all his
embellishments of the Chota Lord Sahib's wonderful visit. When he left
the room at last, I took the stolen goods and laid them at the feet of
the girl and came away without a word.

Later in the day I called again to see Kailas Balm himself. According to
our ugly modern custom, I had been in the habit of making no greeting at
all to this old man when I came into the room. But on this day I made a
low bow, and touched his feet. I am convinced the old man thought that
the coming of the Chota Lord Sahib to his house was the cause of my new
politeness. He was highly gratified by it, and an air of benign severity
shone from his eyes. His friends had flocked in, and he had
already begun to tell again at full length the story of the
Lieutenant-Governor's visit with still further adornments of a most
fantastic kind. The interview was already becoming an epic, both in
quality and in length.

When the other visitors had taken their leave, I made my proposal to the
old man in a humble manner. I told him that, "though I could never for a
moment hope to be worthy of marriage connection with such an illustrious
family, yet... etc. etc."

When I made clear my proposal of marriage, the old man embraced me, and
broke out in a tumult of joy: "I am a poor man, and could never have
expected such great good fortune."

That was the first and last time in his life that Kailas Babu confessed
to being poor. It was also the first and last time in his life that he
forgot, if only for a single moment, the ancestral dignity that belongs
to the Babus of Nayanjore.




LIVING OR DEAD?

I

The widow in the house of Saradasankar, the Ranihat zemindar, had no
kinsmen of her father's family. One after another all had died. Nor
had she in her husband's family any one she could call her own, neither
husband nor son. The child of her brother-in-law Saradasankar was her
darling. Far a long time after his birth, his mother had been very ill,
and the widow, his aunt Kadambini, had fostered him. If a woman fosters
another's child, her love for him is all the stronger because she has
no claim upon him-no claim of kinship, that is, but simply the claim of
love. Love cannot prove its claim by any document which society accepts,
and does not wish to prove it; it merely worships with double passion
its life's uncertain treasure. Thus all the widow's thwarted love went
out to wards this little child. One night in Sraban Kadambini died
suddenly. For some reason her heart stopped beating. Everywhere else the
world held on its course; only in this gentle little breast, suffering
with love, the watch of time stood still for ever.

Lest they should be harassed by the poike, four of the zemindar's
Brahmin servants took away the body, without ceremony, to be burned. The
burning-ground of Ranihat was very far from the village. There was a
hut beside a tank, a huge banian near it, and nothing more. Formerly a
river, now completely dried up, ran through the ground, and part of
the watercourse had been dug out to make a tank for the performance of
funeral rites. The people considered the tank as part of the river and
reverenced it as such.

Taking the body into the hut, the four men sat down to wait for the
wood. The time seemed so long that two of the four grew restless, and
went to see why it did not come. Nitai and Gurucharan being gone, Bidhu
and Banamali remained to watch over the body.

It was a dark night of Sraban. Heavy clouds hung In a starless sky.
The two men sat silent in the dark room. Their matches and lamp were
useless. The matches were damp, and would not light, for all their
efforts, and the lantern went out.

After a long silence, one said: "Brother, it would be good if we had a
bowl of tobacco. In our hurry we brought none."

The other answered: "I can run and bring all we want."

Understanding why Banarnali wanted to go (From fear of ghosts, the
burning-ground being considered haunted.), Bidhu said: "I daresay!
Meanwhile, I suppose I am to sit here alone!"

Conversation ceased again. Five minutes seemed like an hour. In their
minds they cursed the two, who had gone to fetch the wood, and they
began to suspect that they sat gossiping in some pleasant nook. There
was no sound anywhere, except the incessant noise of frogs and crickets
from the tank. Then suddenly they fancied that the bed shook slightly,
as if the dead body had turned on its side. Bidhu and Banamali trembled,
and began muttering: "Ram, Ram." A deep sigh was heard in the room. In a
moment the watchers leapt out of the hut, and raced for the village.

After running about three miles, they met their colleagues coming back
with a lantern. As a matter of fact, they had gone to smoke, and knew
nothing about the wood. But they declared that a tree had been cut down,
and that, when it was split up, it would be brought along at once. Then
Bidhu and Banamali told them what had happened in the hut. Nitai and
Gurucharan scoffed at the story, and abused Bidhu and Banamali angrily
for leaving their duty.

Without delay all four returned to the hut. As they entered, they saw
at once that the body was gone; nothing but an empty bed remained. They
stared at one another. Could a jackal have taken it? But there was no
scrap of clothing anywhere. Going outside, they saw that on the mud
that had collected at the door of the but there were a woman's tiny
footprints, newly made. Saradasankar was no fool, and they could hardly
persuade him to believe in this ghost story. So after much discussion
the four decided that it would be best to say that the body had been
burnt.

Towards dawn, when the men with the wood arrived they were told that,
owing to their delay, the work had been done without them; there had
been some wood in the but after all. No one was likely to question this,
since a dead body is not such a valuable property that any one would
steal it.


II

Every one knows that, even when there is no sign, life is often secretly
present, and may begin again in an apparently dead body. Kadambini was
not dead; only the machine of her life had for some reason suddenly
stopped.

When consciousness returned, she saw dense darkness on all sides. It
occurred to her that she was not lying in her usual place. She called
out "Sister," but no answer came from the darkness. As she sat up,
terror-stricken, she remembered her death-bed, the sudden pain at her
breast, the beginning of a choking sensation. Her elder sister-in-law
was warming some milk for the child, when Kadambini became faint, and
fell on the bed, saying with a choking voice: "Sister, bring the child
here. I am worried." After that everything was black, as when an inkpot
is upset over an exercise-book. Kadambini's memory and consciousness,
all the letters of the world's book, in a moment became formless. The
widow could not remember whether the child, in the sweet voice of love,
called her "Auntie," as if for the last time, or not; she could not
remember whether, as she left the world she knew for death's endless
unknown journey, she had received a parting gift of affection, love's
passage-money for the silent land. At first, I fancy, she thought the
lonely dark place was the House of Yama, where there is nothing to see,
nothing to hear, nothing to do, only an eternal watch. But when a cold
damp wind drove through the open door, and she heard the croaking of
frogs, she remembered vividly and in a moment all the rains of her short
life, and could feel her kinship with the earth. Then came a flash
of lightning, and she saw the tank, the banian, the great plain, the
far-off trees. She remembered how at full moon she had sometimes come
to bathe in this tank, and how dreadful death had seemed when she saw a
corpse on the burning-ground.

Her first thought was to return home. But then she reflected: "I am
dead. How can I return home? That would bring disaster on them. I have
left the kingdom of the living; I am my own ghost!" If this were not so,
she reasoned, how could she have got out of Saradasankar's well-guarded
zenana, and come to this distant burningground at midnight? Also, if her
funeral rites had not been finished, where had the men gone who should
burn her? Recalling her death-moment in Saradasankar's brightly-lit
house, she now found herself alone in a distant, deserted, dark burning.
ground. Surely she was no member of earthly society! Surely she was a
creature of horror, of ill-omen, her own ghost!

At this thought, all the bonds were snapped which bound her to the
world. She felt that she had marvellous strength, endless freedom. She
could do what she liked, go where she pleased. Mad with the inspiration
of this new idea, she rushed from the but like a gust of wind, and stood
upon the burning ground. All trace of shame or fear had left her.

But as she walked on and on, her feet grew tired, her body weak.
The plain stretched on endlessly; here and there were paddy-fields;
sometimes she found herself standing knee-deep in water.

At the first glimmer of dawn she heard one or two birds cry from the
bamboo-clumps by the distant houses. Then terror seized her. She could
not tell in what new relation she stood to the earth and to living folk.
So long as she had been on the plain, on the burning-ground, covered by
the dark night of Sraban, so long she had been fearless, a denizen of
her own kingdom. By daylight the homes of men filled her with fear. Men
and ghosts dread each other, for their tribes inhabit different banks of
the river of death.

III

Her clothes were clotted in the mud; strange thoughts and walking by
night had given her the aspect of a madwoman; truly, her apparition was
such that folk might have been afraid of her, and children might have
stoned her or run away. Luckily, the first to catch sight of her was a
traveller. He came up, and said: "Mother, you look a respectable woman.
Wherever are you going, alone and in this guise?"

Kadambini, unable to collect her thoughts, stared at him in silence.
She could not think that she was still in touch with the world, that
she looked like a respectable woman, that a traveller was asking her
questions.

Again the min said: "Come, mother, I will see you home. Tell me where
you live."

Kadambini thought. To return to her father-in-law's house would be
absurd, and she had no father's house. Then she remembered the friend of
her childhood. She had not seen Jogmaya since the days of her youth,
but from time to time they had exchanged letters. Occasionally there had
been quarrels between them, as was only right, since Kadambini wished to
make it dear that her love for Jogmaya was unbounded, while her friend
complained that Kadambini did not return a love equal to her own. They
were both sure that, if they once met, they would be inseparable.

Kadambini said to the traveller: "I will go to Sripati's house at
Nisindapur."

As he was going to Calcutta, Nisindapur, though not near, was on his
way. So he took Kadambini to Sripati s house, and the friends met
again. At first they did not recognise one another, but gradually each
recognised the features of the other's childhood.

"What luck!" said Jogmaya. "I never dreamt that I should see you again.
But how hate you come here, sister? Your father-in-law's folk surely
didn't let you go!"

Kadambini remained silent, and at last said: "Sister, do not ask about
my father-in-law. Give me a corner, and treat me as a servant: I will do
your work."

"What?" cried Jogmaya. "Keep you like a servant! Why, you are my closest
friend, you are my--" and so on and so on.

Just then Sripati came in. Kadambini stared at him for some time, and
then went out very slowly. She kept her head uncovered, and showed not
the slightest modesty or respect. Jogmaya, fearing that Sripati would
be prejudiced against her friend, began an elaborate explanation. But
Sripati, who readily agreed to anything Jogmaya said, cut short her
story, and left his wife uneasy in her mind.

Kadambini had come, but she was not at one with her friend: death was
between them. She could feel no intimacy for others so long as her
existence perplexed her and consciousness remained. Kadambini would look
at Jogmaya, and brood. She would think: "She has her husband and her
work, she lives in a world far away from mine. She shares affection and
duty with the people of the world; I am an empty shadow. She is among
the living; I am in eternity."

Jogmaya also was uneasy, but could not explain why. Women do not love
mystery, because, though uncertainty may be transmuted into poetry, into
heroism, into scholarship, it cannot be turned to account in household
work. So, when a woman cannot understand a thing, she either destroys
and forgets it, or she shapes it anew for her own use; if she fails to
deal with it in one of these ways, she loses her temper with it. The
greater Kadambini's abstraction became, the more impatient was Jogmaya
with her, wondering what trouble weighed upon her mind.

Then a new danger arose. Kadambini was afraid of herself; yet she could
not flee from herself. Those who fear ghosts fear those who are behind
them; wherever they cannot see there is fear. But Kadambini's chief
terror lay in herself, for she dreaded nothing external. At the dead of
night, when alone in her room, she screamed; in the evening, when she
saw her shadow in the lamp-light, her whole body shook. Watching her
fearfulness, the rest of the house fell into a sort of terror. The
servants and Jogmaya herself began to see ghosts.

One midnight, Kadambini came out from her bedroom weeping, and wailed at
Jogmaya's door: "Sister, sister, let me lie at your feet! Do not put me
by myself!"

Jogmaya's anger was no less than her fear. She would have liked to drive
Kadambini from the house that very second. The good-natured Sripati,
after much effort, succeeded in quieting their guest, and put her in the
next room.

Next day Sripati was unexpectedly summoned to his wife's apartments.
She began to upbraid him: "You, do you call yourself a man? A woman runs
away from her father-in-law, and enters your house; a month passes,
and you haven't hinted that she should go away, nor have I heard the
slightest protest from you. I should cake it as a favour if you would
explain yourself. You men are all alike."

Men, as a race, have a natural partiality for womankind in general,
foe which women themselves hold them accountable. Although Sripati
was prepared to touch Jogmaya's body, and swear that his kind feeling
towards the helpless but beautiful Kadambini was no whit greater than it
should be, he could not prove it by his behaviour. He thought that her
father-in-law's people must have treated this forlorn widow abominably,
if she could bear it no longer, and was driven to take refuge with
him. As she had neither father nor mother, how could he desert her? So
saying, he let the matter drop, far he had no mind to distress Kadambini
by asking her unpleasant questions.

His wife, then, tried other means of her sluggish lord, until at last
he saw that for the sake of peace he must send word to Kadambini's
father-in-law. The result of a letter, he thought, might not be
satisfactory; so he resolved to go to Ranihat, and act on what he
learnt.

So Sripati went, and Jogmaya on her part said to Kadambini "Friend, it
hardly seems proper for you to stop here any longer. What will people
say?"

Kadambini stared solemnly at Jogmaya, and said: "What have I to do with
people?"

Jogmaya was astounded. Then she said sharply: "If you have nothing to
do with people, we have. How can we explain the detention of a woman
belonging to another house?"

Kadambini said: "Where is my father-in-law's house?"

"Confound it!" thought Jogmaya. "What will the wretched woman say next?"

Very slowly Kadambini said: "What have I to do with you? Am I of the
earth? You laugh, weep, love; each grips and holds his own; I merely
look. You are human, I a shadow. I cannot understand why God has kept me
in this world of yours."

So strange were her look and speech that Jogmaya understood something of
her drift, though not all. Unable either to dismiss her, or to ask her
any more questions, she went away, oppressed with thought.

IV

It was nearly ten o'clock at night when Sripati returned from Ranihat.
The earth was drowned in torrents of rain. It seemed that the downpour
would never stop, that the night would never end.

Jogmaya asked: "Well?"

"I've lots to say, presently."

So saying, Sripati changed his clothes, and sat down to supper; then he
lay dawn for a smoke. His mind was perplexed.

His wife stilled her curiosity for a long time; then she came to his
couch and demanded: "What did you hear?"

"That you have certainly made a mistake."

Jogmaya was nettled. Women never make mistakes, or, if they do, a
sensible man never mentions them; it is better to take them on his own
shoulders. Jogmaya snapped: "May I be permitted to hear how?"

Sripati replied: "The woman you have taken into your house is not your
Kadambini."

Hearing this, she was greatly annoyed, especially since it was her
husband who said it. "What! I don't know my own friend? I must come to
you to recognise her! You are clever, indeed!"

Sripati explained that there was no need to quarrel about his
cleverness. He could prove what he said. There was no doubt that
Jogmaya's Kadambini was dead.

Jogmaya replied: "Listen! You've certainly made some huge mistake.
You've been to the wrong house, or are confused as to what you have
heard. Who told you to go yourself? Write a letter, and everything will
be cleared up."

Sripati was hurt by his wife's lack of faith in his executive ability;
he produced all sorts of proof, without result. Midnight found them
still asserting and contradicting. Although they were both agreed now
that Kadambini should be got out of the house, although Sripati believed
that their guest had deceived his wife all the time by a pretended
acquaintance, and Jogmaya that she was a prostitute, yet in the present
discussion neither would acknowledge defeat. By degrees their voices
became so loud that they forgot that Kadambini was sleeping in the next
room.

The one said: "We're in a nice fix! I tell you, I heard it with my own
ears!" And the other answered angrily: "What do I care about that? I can
see with my own eyes, surely."

At length Jogmaya said: "Very well. Tell me when Kadambini died." She
thought that if she could find a discrepancy between the day of death
and the date of some letter from Kadambini, she could prove that Sripati
erred.

He told her the date of Kadambini's death, and they both saw that it
fell on the very day before she came to their house. Jogmaya's heart
trembled, even Sripati was not unmoved.

Just then the door flew open; a damp wind swept in and blew the lamp
out. The darkness rushed after it, and filled the whole house. Kadambini
stood in the room. It was nearly one o'clock, the rain was pelting
outside.

Kadambini spoke: "Friend, I am your Kadambini, but I am no longer
living. I am dead."

Jogmaya screamed with terror; Sripati could speak.

"But, save in being dead, I have done you no wrong. If I have no place
among the living, I have none among the dead. Oh! whither shall I go?"

Crying as if to wake the sleeping Creator in the dense night of rain,
she asked again: "Oh! whither shall I go?"

So saying Kadambini left her friend fainting in the dark house, and went
out into the world, seeking her own place.

V

It is hard to say how Kadambini reached Ranihat. At first she showed
herself to no one, but spent the whole day in a ruined temple, starving.
When the untimely afternoon of the rains was pitch-black, and people
huddled into their houses for fear of the impending storm, then
Kadambini came forth. Her heart trembled as she reached her
father-in-law's house; and when, drawing a thick veil over her face,
she entered, none of the doorkeepers objected, since they took her for a
servant. And the rain was pouring down, and the wind howled.

The mistress, Saradasankar's wife, was playing cards with her widowed
sister. A servant was in the kitchen, the sick child was sleeping in the
bedroom. Kadambini, escaping every one's notice, entered this room. I do
not know why she had come to her father-in-law's house; she herself did
not know; she felt only that she wanted to see her child again. She had
no thought where to go next, or what to do.

In the lighted room she saw the child sleeping, his fists clenched, his
body wasted with fever. At sight of him, her heart became parched and
thirsty. If only she could press that tortured body to her breast!
Immediately the thought followed: "I do not exist. Who would see it? His
mother loves company, loves gossip and cards. All the time that she left
me in charge, she was herself free from anxiety, nor was she troubled
about him in the least. Who will look after him now as I did?"

The child turned on his side, and cried, half-asleep: "Auntie, give
me water." Her darling had not yet forgotten his auntie! In a fever of
excitement, she poured out some water, and, taking him to her breast,
she gave it him.

As long as he was asleep, the child felt no strangeness in taking water
from the accustomed hand. But when Kadambini satisfied her long-starved
longing, and kissed him and began rocking him asleep again, he awoke and
embraced her. "Did you die, Auntie?" he asked.

"Yes, darling."

"And you have come back? Do not die again."

Before she could answer disaster overtook her. One of the maidservants
coming in with a cup of sago dropped it, and fell down. At the crash the
mistress left her cards, and entered the room. She stood like a pillar
of wood, unable to flee or speak. Seeing all this, the child, too,
became terrified, and burst out weeping: "Go away, Auntie," he said, "go
away!"

Now at last Kadambini understood that she had not died. The old room,
the old things, the same child, the same love, all returned to their
living state, without change or difference between her and them. In her
friend's house she had felt that her childhood's companion was dead. In
her child's room she knew that the boy's "Auntie" was not dead at all.
In anguished tones she said: "Sister, why do you dread me? See, I am as
you knew me."

Her sister-in-law could endure no longer, and fell into a faint.
Saradasankar himself entered the zenana. With folded hands, he said
piteously: "Is this right? Satis is my only son. Why do you show
yourself to him? Are we not your own kin? Since you went, he has wasted
away daily; his fever has been incessant; day and night he cries:
'Auntie, Auntie.' You have left the world; break these bonds of maya
(Illusory affection binding a soul to the world). We will perform all
funeral honours."

Kadambini could bear no more. She said: "Oh, I am not dead, I am not
dead. Oh, how can I persuade you that I am not dead? I am living,
living!" She lifted a brass pot from the ground and dashed it against
her forehead. The blood ran from her brow. "Look!" she cried, "I am
living!" Saradasankar stood like an image; the child screamed with fear,
the two fainting women lay still.

Then Kadambini, shouting "I am not dead, I am not dead," went down
the steps to the zenana well, and plunged in. From the upper storey
Saradasankar heard the splash.

All night the rain poured; it poured next day at dawn, was pouring still
at noon. By dying, Kadambini had given proof that she was not dead.




"WE CROWN THEE KING"

When Nabendu Sekhar was wedded to Arunlekha, the God of marriage smiled
from behind the sacrificial fire. Alas! what is sport for the gods is
not always a joke to us poor mortals.

Purnendu Sekhar, the father of Nabendu, was a man well known amongst
the English officials of the Government. In the voyage of life he had
arrived at the desert shores of Rai Bahadurship by diligently plying his
oats of salaams. He held in reserve enough for further advancement, but
at the age of fifty-five, his tender gaze still fixed on the misty peals
of Raja-hood, he suddenly found himself transported to a region where
earthly honours and decorations are naught, and his salaam-wearied neck
found everlasting repose on the funeral pyre.

According to modern science, force is not destroyed, but is merely
converted to another form, and applied to another point. So Purnendu's
salaam-force, constant handmaid of the fickle Goddess of Fortune,
descended from the shoulder of the father to that of his worthy son; and
the youthful head of Nabendu Sekhar began to move up and down, at the
doors of high-placed Englishmen, like a pumpkin swayed by the wind.

The traditions of the family into which he had married were entirely
different. Its eldest son, Pramathanath, had won for himself the love
of his kinsfolk and the regard of all who knew him. His kinsmen and his
neighbours looked up to him as their ideal in all things.

Pramathanath was a Bachelor of Arts, and in addition was gifted with
common sense. But he held no high official position; he had no handsome
salary; nor did he exert any influence with his pen. There was no one in
power to lend him a helping hand, because he desired to keep away
from Englishmen, as much as they desired to keep away from him. So it
happened that he shone only within the sphere of his family and his
friends, and excited no admiration beyond it.

Yet this Pramathanath had once sojourned in England for some three
years. The kindly treatment he received during his stay there
overpowered him so much that he forgot the sorrow and the humiliation of
his own country, and came back dressed in European clothes. This rather
grieved his brothers and his sisters at first, but after a few days they
began to think that European clothes suited nobody better, and gradually
they came to share his pride and dignity.

On his return from England, Pramathanath resolved that he would show the
world how to associate with Anglo-Indians on terms of equality. Those of
our countrymen who think that no such association is possible, unless
we bend our knees to them, showed their utter lack of self-respect, and
were also unjust to the English-so thought Pramathanath.

He brought with him letters of introduction from many distinguished
Englishmen at home, and these gave him some recognition in Anglo-Indian
society. He and his wife occasionally enjoyed English hospitality at
tea, dinner, sports and other entertainments. Such good luck intoxicated
him, and began to produce a tingling sensation in every vein of his
body.

About this time, at the opening of a new railway line, many of the
town, proud recipients of official favour, were invited by the
Lieutenant-Governor to take the first trip. Pramathanath was among them.
On the return journey, a European Sergeant of the Police expelled
some Indian gentlemen from a railway-carriage with great insolence.
Pramathanath, dressed in his European clothes, was there. He, too, was
getting out, when the Sergeant said: "You needn't move, sir. Keep your
seat, please."

At first Pramathanath felt flattered at the special respect thus shown
to him. When, however, the train went on, the dull rays of the setting
sun, at the west of the fields, now ploughed up and stripped of green,
seemed in his eyes to spread a glow of shame over the whole country.
Sitting near the window of his lonely compartment, he seemed to catch
a glimpse of the down-cast eyes of his Motherland, hidden behind the
trees. As Pramathanath sat there, lost in reverie, burning tears flowed
down his cheeks, and his heart burst with indignation.

He now remembered the story of a donkey who was drawing the chariot
of an idol along the street. The wayfarers bowed down to the idol,
and touched the dusty ground with their foreheads. The foolish donkey
imagined that all this reverence was being shown to him. "The only
difference," said Pramathanath to himself, "between the donkey and
myself is this: I understand to-day that the respect I receive is not
given to me but to the burden on my back."

Arriving home, Pramathanath called together all the children of the
household, and lighting a big bonfire, threw all his European clothes
into it one by one. The children danced round and round it, and the
higher the flames shot up, the greater was their merriment. After that,
Pramathanath gave up his sip of tea and bits of toast in Anglo-Indian
houses, and once again sat inaccessible within the castle of his house,
while his insulted friends went about from the door of one Englishman to
that of another, bending their turbaned heads as before.

By an irony of fate, poor Nabendu Sekhar married the second daughter of
this house. His sisters-in-law were well educated and handsome. Nabendu
considered he had made a lucky bargain. But he lost no time in trying to
impress on the family that it was a rare bargain on their side also. As
if by mistake, he would often hand to his sisters-in-law sundry letters
that his late father had received from Europeans. And when the cherry
lips of those young ladies smiled sarcastically, and the point of a
shining dagger peeped out of its sheath of red velvet, the unfortunate
man saw his folly, and regretted it.

Labanyalekha, the eldest sister, surpassed the rest in beauty and
cleverness. Finding an auspicious day, she put on the mantel-shelf of
Nabendu's bedroom two pairs of English boots, daubed with vermilion, and
arranged flowers, sandal-paste, incense and a couple of burning candles
before them in true ceremonial fashion. When Nabendu came in, the
two sisters-in-law stood on either side of him, and said with mock
solemnity: "Bow down to your gods, and may you prosper through their
blessings."

The third sister Kiranlekha spent many days in embroidering with red
silk one hundred common English names such as Jones, Smith, Brown,
Thomson, etc., on a chadar. When it was ready, she presented this
namavoli (A namavoli is a sheet of cloth printed all over with the names
of Hindu gods and goddesses and worn by pious Hindus when engaged in
devotional exercises.) to Nabendu Sekhar with great ceremony.

The fourth, Sasankalekha, of tender age and therefore of no account,
said: "I will make you a string of beads, brother, with which to tell
the names of your gods-the sahibs." Her sisters reproved her, saying:
"Run away, you saucy girl."

Feelings of shame and irritation assailed by turns the mind of Nabendu
Sekhar. Still he could not forego the company of his sisters-in-law,
especially as the eldest one was beautiful. Her honey was no less than
her gall, and Nabendu's mind tasted at once the sweetness of the one
and the bitterness of the other. The butterfly, with its bruised wings,
buzzes round the flower in blind fury, unable to depart.

The society of his sisters-in-Law so much infatuated him that at last
Nabendu began to disavow his craving for European favours. When he
went to salaam the Burra Sahib, he used to pretend that he was going
to listen to a speech by Mr. Surendranath Banerjea. When he went to
the railway station to pay respects to the Chota Sahib, returning
from Darjeeling, he would tell his sisters-in-law that he expected his
youngest uncle.

It was a sore trial to the unhappy man placed between the cross-fires of
his Sahibs and his sisters-in-law. The sisters-in-law, however, secretly
vowed that they would not rest till the Sahibs had been put to rout.

About this time it was rumoured that Nabendu's name would be included
in the forthcoming list of Birthday honours, and that he would mount the
first step of the ladder to Paradise by becoming a Rai Bahadur. The
poor fellow had not the courage to break the joyful news to his
sisters-in-law. One evening, however, when the autumn moon was flooding
the earth with its mischievous beams, Nabendu's heart was so full that
he could not contain himself any longer, and he told his wife. The
next day, Mrs. Nabendu betook herself to her eldest sister's house in a
palanquin, and in a voice choked with tears bewailed her lot.

"He isn't going to grow a tail," said Labanya, "by becoming a Rai
Bahadur, is he? Why should you feel so very humiliated?"

"Oh, no, sister dear," replied Arunlekha, "I am prepared to be
anything--but not a Rai-Baha-durni." The fact was that in her circle
of acquaintances there was one Bhutnath Babu, who was a Rai Bahadur, and
that explained her intense aversion to that title.

Labanya said to her sister in soothing tones: "Don't be upset about it,
dear; I will see what I can do to prevent it."

Babu Nilratan, the husband of Labanya, was a pleader at Buxar. When the
autumn was over, Nabendu received an invitation from Labanya to pay them
a visit, and he started for Buxar greatly pleased.

The early winter of the western province endowed Labanyalekha with new
health and beauty, and brought a glowing colour to her pale cheeks, She
looked like the flower-laden kasa reeds on a clear autumn day, growing
by the lonely bank of a rivulet. To Nabendu's enchanted eyes she
appeared like a malati plant in full blossom, showering dew-drops
brilliant with the morning light.

Nabendu had never felt better in his life. The exhilaration of his own
health and the genial company of his pretty sister-in-law made him think
himself light enough to tread on air. The Ganges in front of the garden
seemed to him to be flowing ceaselessly to regions unknown, as though it
gave shape to his own wild fantasies.

As he returned in the early morning from his walk on the bank of the
river, the mellow rays of the winter sun gave his whole frame that
pleasing sensation of warmth which lovers feel in each other's arms.
Coming home, he would now and then find his sister-in-Law amusing
herself by cooking some dishes. He would offer his help, and display his
want of skill and ignorance at every step. But Nabendu did not appear to
be at all anxious to improve himself by practice and attention. On
the contrary he thoroughly enjoyed the rebukes he received from his
sister-in-law. He was at great pains to prove every day that he was
inefficient and helpless as a new-born babe in mixing spices, handling
the saucepan, and regulating the heat so as to prevent things getting
burnt-and he was duly rewarded with pitiful smiles and scoldings.

In the middle of the day he ate a great deal of the good food set before
him, incited by his keen appetite and the coaxing of his sister-in-law.
Later on, he would sit down to a game of cards--at which he betrayed
the same lack of ability. He would cheat, pry into his adversary's hand,
quarrel--but never did he win a single rubber, and worse still, he would
not acknowledge defeat. This brought him abuse every day, and still he
remained incorrigible.

There was, however, one matter in which his reform was complete. For the
time at least, he had forgotten that to win the smiles of Sahibs was the
final goal of life. He was beginning to understand how happy and worthy
we might feel by winning the affection and esteem of those near and dear
to us.

Besides, Nabendu was now moving in a new atmosphere. Labanya's husband,
Babu Nilratan, a leader of the bar, was reproached by many because
he refused to pay his respects to European officials. To all such
reproaches Nilratan would reply: "No, thank you,--if they are not polite
enough to return my call, then the politeness I offer them is a loss
that can never be made up for. The sands of the desert may be very white
and shiny, but I would much rather sow my seeds in black soil, where I
can expect a return."

And Nabendu began to adopt similar ideas, all regardless of the future.
His chance of Rai Bahadurship throve on the soil carefully prepared by
his late father and also by himself in days gone by, nor was any fresh
watering required. Had he not at great expense laid out a splendid
race-course in a town, which was a fashionable resort of Europeans?

When the time of Congress drew near, Nilratan received a request from
head-quarters to collect subscriptions. Nabendu, free from anxiety,
was merrily engaged in a game of cards with his sister-in-law, when
Nilratan Babu came upon him with a subscription-book in his hand, and
said: "Your signature, please."

From old habit Nabendu looked horrified. Labanya, assuming an air of
great concern and anxiety, said: "Never do that. It would ruin your
racecourse beyond repair."

Nabendu blurted out: "Do you suppose I pass sleepless nights through
fear of that?"

"We won't publish your name in the papers," said Nilratan reassuringly.

Labanya, looking grave and anxious, said: "Still, it wouldn't be safe.
Things spread so, from mouth to mouth--"

Nabendu replied with vehemence: "My name wouldn't suffer by appearing
in the newspapers." So saying, he snatched the subscription list from
Nilratan's hand, and signed away a thousand rupees. Secretly he hoped
that the papers would not publish the news.

Labanya struck her forehead with her palm and gasped out: "What--have
you--done?"

"Nothing wrong," said Nabendu boastfully.

"But--but--," drawled Labanya, "the Guard sahib of Sealdah Station,
the shop-assistant at Whiteaway's, the syce-sahib of Hart Bros.--these
gentlemen might be angry with you, and decline to come to your Poojah
dinner to drink your champagne, you know. Just think, they mightn't pat
you on the back, when you meet them again!"

"It wouldn't break my heart," Nabendu snapped out.

A few days passed. One morning Nabendu was sipping his tea, and glancing
at a newspaper. Suddenly a letter signed "X" caught his eye. The writer
thanked him profusely for his donation, and declared that the increase
of strength the Congress had acquired by having such a man within its
fold, was inestimable.

Alas, father Purnendu Sekhar! Was it to increase the strength of the
Congress, that you brought this wretch into the world?

Put the cloud of misfortune had its silver lining. That he was not a
mere cypher was clear from the fact that the Anglo-Indian community on
the one side and the Congress on the other were each waiting patiently,
eager to hook him, and land him on their own side. So Nabendu, beaming
with pleasure took the paper to his sister-in-law, and showed her the
letter. Looking as though she knew nothing about it, Labanya exclaimed
in surprise: "Oh, what a pity! Everything has come out! Who bore you
such ill-will? Oh, how cruel of him, how wicked of him!"

Nabendu laughed out, saying: "Now--now--don't call him names, Labanya. I
forgive him with all my heart, and bless him too."

A couple of days after this, an anti-Congress Anglo-Indian paper reached
Nabendu through the post. There was a letter in it, signed "One who
knows," and contradicting the above report. "Those who have the pleasure
of Babu Nabendu Sekhar's personal acquaintance," the writer went on,
"cannot for a moment believe this absurd libel to be true. For him to
turn a Congresswalla is as impossible as it is for the leopard to change
his spots. He is a man of genuine worth, and neither a disappointed
candidate for Government employ nor a briefless barrister. He is not one
of those who, after a brief sojourn in England, return aping our dress
and manners, audaciously try to thrust themselves on Anglo-Indian
society, and finally go back in dejection. So there is absolutely no
reason why Balm Nabendu Sekhar," etc., etc.

Ah, father Purnendu Sekhar! What a reputation you had made with the
Europeans before you died!

This letter also was paraded before his sister-in-law, for did it not
assert that he was no mean, contemptible scallywag, but a man of real
worth?

Labanya exclaimed again in feigned surprise: "Which of your friends
wrote it now? Oh, come--is it the Ticket Collector, or the hide
merchant, or is it the drum-major of the Fort?"

"You ought to send in a contradiction, I think," said Nilratan.

"Is it necessary?" said Nabendu loftily. "Must I contradict every little
thing they choose to say against me?"

Labanya filled the room with a deluge of laughter. Nabendu felt a little
disconcerted at this, and said: "Why? What's the matter?" She went on
laughing, unable to check herself, and her youthful slender form waved
to and fro. This torrent of merriment had the effect of overthrowing
Nabendu completely, and he said in pitiable accents: "Do you imagine
that I am afraid to contradict it?"

"Oh, dear, no," said Labanya; "I was thinking that you haven't yet
ceased trying to save that race-course of yours, so full of promise.
While there is life, there is hope, you know."

"That's what I am afraid of, you think, do you? Very well, you shall
see," said Nabendu desperately, and forthwith sat down to write his
contradiction. When he had finished, Labanya and Nilratan read it
through, and said: "It isn't strong enough. We must give it them pretty
hot, mustn't we?" And they kindly undertook to revise the composition.
Thus it ran: "When one connected to us by ties of blood turns our enemy
he becomes far more dangerous than any outsider. To the Government of
India, the haughty Anglo-Indians are worse enemies than the Russians
or the frontier Pathans themselves--they are the impenetrable barrier,
forever hindering the growth of any bond of friendship between the
Government and people of the country. It is the Congress which has
opened up the royal road to a better understanding between the rulers
and the ruled, and the Anglo-Indian papers have planted themselves like
thorns across the whole breadth of that road," etc., etc.

Nabendu had an inward fear as to the mischief this letter might do, but
at the same time he felt elated at the excellence of its composition,
which he fondly imagined to be his own. It was duly published, and
for some days comments, replies, and rejoinders went on in various
newspapers, and the air was full of trumpet-notes, proclaiming the
fact that Nabendu had joined the Congress, and the amount of his
subscription.

Nabendu, now grown desperate, talked as though he was a patriot of
the fiercest type. Labanya laughed inwardly, and said to herself:
"Well---well--you have to pass through the ordeal of fire yet."

One morning when Nabendu, before his bath, had finished rubbing oil
over his chest, and was trying various devices to reach the inaccessible
portions of his back, the bearer brought in a card inscribed with the
name of the District Magistrate himself! Good heavens!--What would he
do? He could not possibly go, and receive the Magistrate Sahib, thus
oil-besmeared. He shook and twitched like a koi-fish, ready dressed for
the frying pan. He finished his bath in a great hurry, tugged on his
clothes somehow, and ran breathlessly to the outer apartments. The
bearer said that the Sahib had just left after waiting for a long time.
How much of the blame for concocting this drama of invented incidents
may be set down to Labanya, and how much to the bearer is a nice problem
for ethical mathematics to solve.

Nabendu's heart was convulsed with pain within his breast, like the tail
of a lizard just cut off. He moped like an owl all day long.

Labanya banished all traces of inward merriment from her face, and kept
on enquiring in anxious tones: "What has happened to you? You are not
ill, I hope?"

Nabendu made great efforts to smile, and find a humorous reply. "How
can there be," he managed to say, "any illness within your jurisdiction,
since you yourself are the Goddess of Health?"

But the smile soon flickered out. His thoughts were: "I subscribed
to the Congress fund to begin with, published a nasty letter in a
newspaper, and on the top of that, when the Magistrate Sahib himself
did me the honour to call on me, I kept him waiting. I wonder what he is
thinking of me."

Alas, father Purnendu Sekhar, by an irony of Fate I am made to appear
what I am not.

The next morning, Nabendu decked himself in his best clothes, wore his
watch and chain, and put a big turban on his head.

"Where are you off to?" enquired his sister-in-law.

"Urgent business," Nabendu replied. Labanya kept quiet.

Arriving at the Magistrate's gate, he took out his card-case.

"You cannot see him now," said the orderly peon icily.

Nabendu took out a couple of rupees from his pocket. The peon at once
salaamed him and said: "There are five of us, sir." Immediately Nabendu
pulled out a ten-rupee note, and handed it to him.

He was sent for by the Magistrate, who was writing in his dressing-gown
and bedroom slippers. Nabendu salaamed him. The Magistrate pointed to
a chair with his finger, and without raising his eyes from the paper
before him said: "What can I do for you, Babu?"

Fingering his watch-chain nervously, Nabendu said is shaky tones:
"Yesterday you were good enough to call at my place, sir--"

The Sahib knitted his brows, and, lifting just one eye from his paper,
said: "I called at your place! Babu, what nonsense are you talking?"

"Beg your pardon, sir," faltered out Nabendu. "There has been a
mistake--some confusion," and wet with perspiration, he tumbled out
of the room somehow. And that night, as he lay tossing on his bed, a
distant dream-like voice came into his ear with a recurring persistency:
"Babu, you are a howling idiot."

On his way home, Nabendu came to the conclusion that the Magistrate
denied having called, simply because he was highly offended.

So he explained to Labanya that he had been out purchasing rose-water.
No sooner had he uttered the words than half-a-dozen chuprassis wearing
the Collectorate badge made their appearance, and after salaaming
Nabendu, stood there grinning.

"Have they come to arrest you because you subscribed to the Congress
fund?" whispered Labanya with a smile.

The six peons displayed a dozen rows of teeth and said:
"Bakshish--Babu-Sahib."

From a side room Nilratan came out, and said in an irritated manner:
"Bakshish? What for?"

The peons, grinning as before, answered: "The Babu-Sahib went to see the
Magistrate--so we have come for bakshish."

"I didn't know," laughed out Labanya, "that the Magistrate was selling
rose-water nowadays. Coolness wasn't the special feature of his trade
before."

Nabendu in trying to reconcile the story of his purchase with his visit
to the Magistrate, uttered some incoherent words, which nobody could
make sense of.

Nilratan spoke to the peons: "There has been no occasion for bakshish;
you shan't have it."

Nabendu said, feeling very small: "Oh, they are poor men--what's
the harm of giving them something?" And he took out a currency note.
Nilratan snatched it way from Nabendu's hand, remarking: "There are
poorer men in the world--I will give it to them for you."

Nabendu felt greatly distressed that he was not able to appease these
ghostly retainers of the angry Siva. When the peons were leaving, with
thunder in their eyes, he looked at them languishingly, as much as to
say: "You know everything, gentlemen, it is not my fault."

The Congress was to be held at Calcutta this year. Nilratan went down
thither with his wife to attend the sittings. Nabendu accompanied them.

As soon as they arrived at Calcutta, the Congress party surrounded
Nabendu, and their delight and enthusiasm knew no bounds. They cheered
him, honoured him, and extolled him up to the skies. Everybody said
that, unless leading men like Nabendu devoted themselves to the Cause,
there was no hope for the country. Nabendu was disposed to agree with
them, and emerged out of the chaos of mistake and confusion as a leader
of the country. When he entered the Congress Pavilion on the first day,
everybody stood up, and shouted "Hip, hip, hurrah," in a loud outlandish
voice, hearing which our Motherland reddened with shame to the root of
her ears.

In due time the Queen's birthday came, and Nabendu's name was not found
in the list of Rai Bahadurs.

He received an invitation from Labanya for that evening. When he arrived
there, Labanya with great pomp and ceremony presented him with a robe
of honour, and with her own hand put a mark of red sandal paste on the
middle of his forehead. Each of the other sisters threw round his neck a
garland of flowers woven by herself. Decked in a pink Sari and dazzling
jewels, his wife Arunlekha was waiting in a side room, her face lit up
with smiles and blushes. Her sisters rushed to her, and, placing another
garland in her hand, insisted that she also should come, and do her
part in the ceremony, but she would not listen to it; and that principal
garland, cherishing a desire for Nabendu's neck, waited patiently for
the still secrecy of midnight.

The sisters said to Nabendu: "To-day we crown thee King. Such honour
will not be done to any body else in Hindoostan."

Whether Nabendu derived any consolation from this, he alone can tell;
but we greatly doubt it. We believe, in fact, that he will become a
Rai Bahadur before he has done, and the Englishman and the Pioneer will
write heart-rending articles lamenting his demise at the proper time.
So, in the meanwhile, Three Cheers for Babu Purnendu Sekhar! Hip, hip,
hurrah--Hip, hip, hurrah--Hip, hip, hurrah.




THE RENUNCIATION

I

It was a night of full moon early in the month of Phalgun. The youthful
spring was everywhere sending forth its breeze laden with the fragrance
of mango-blossoms. The melodious notes of an untiring papiya (One of the
sweetest songsters in Bengal. Anglo-Indian writers have nicknamed it the
"brain-fever bird," which is a sheer libel.), concealed within the
thick foliage of an old lichi tree by the side of a tank, penetrated a
sleepless bedroom of the Mukerji family. There Hemanta now restlessly
twisted a lock of his wife's hair round his finger, now beat her churl
against her wristlet until it tinkled, now pulled at the chaplet of
flowers about her head, and left it hanging over hex face. His mood
was that of as evening breeze which played about a favourite flowering
shrub, gently shaking her now this side, now that, in the hope of
rousing her to animation.

But Kusum sat motionless, looking out of the open window, with eyes
immersed in the moonlit depth of never-ending space beyond. Her
husband's caresses were lost on her.

At last Hemanta clasped both the hands of his wife, and, shaking them
gently, said: "Kusum, where are you? A patient search through a big
telescope would reveal you only as a small speck-you seem to have
receded so far away. O, do come closer to me, dear. See how beautiful
the night is."

Kusum turned her eyes from the void of space towards her husband, and
said slowly: "I know a mantra (A set of magic words.), which could in
one moment shatter this spring night and the moon into pieces."

"If you do," laughed Hemanta, "pray don't utter it. If any mantra of
yours could bring three or four Saturdays during the week, and prolong
the nights till 5 P.M. the next day, say it by all means."

Saying this, he tried to draw his wife a little closer to him. Kusum,
freeing herself from the embrace, said: "Do you know, to-night I feel
a longing to tell you what I promised to reveal only on my death-bed.
To-night I feel that I could endure whatever punishment you might
inflict on me."

Hemanta was on the point of making a jest about punishments by reciting
a verse from Jayadeva, when the sound of an angry pair of slippers
was heard approaching rapidly. They were the familiar footsteps of his
father, Haribar Mukerji, and Hemanta, not knowing what it meant, was in
a flutter of excitement.

Standing outside the door Harihar roared out: "Hemanta, turn your wife
out of the house immediately."

Hemanta looked at his wife, and detected no trace of surprise in her
features. She merely buried her face within the palms of her hands, and,
with all the strength and intensity of her soul, wished that she could
then and there melt into nothingness. It was the same papiya whose
song floated into the room with the south breeze, and no one heard it.
Endless are the beauties of the earth-but alas, how easily everything is
twisted out of shape.

II

Returning from without, Hemanta asked his wife: "Is it true?"

"It is," replied Kusum.

"Why didn't you tell me long ago?"

"I did try many a time, and I always failed. I am a wretched woman."

"Then tell me everything now."

Kusum gravely told her story in a firm unshaken voice. She waded
barefooted through fire, as it were, with slow unflinching steps, and
nobody knew how much she was scorched. Having heard her to the end,
Hemanta rose and walked out.

Kusum thought that her husband had gone, never to return to her again.
It did not strike her as strange. She took it as naturally as any other
incident of everyday life-so dry and apathetic had her mind become
during the last few moments. Only the world and love seemed to her as
a void and make-believe from beginning to end. Even the memory of the
protestations of love, which her husband had made to her in days past,
brought to her lips a dry, hard, joyless smile, like a sharp cruel knife
which had cut through her heart. She was thinking, perhaps, that the
love which seemed to fill so much of one's life, which brought in its
train such fondness and depth of feeling, which made even the briefest
separation so exquisitely painful and a moment's union so intensely
sweet, which seemed boundless in its extent and eternal in its
duration, the cessation of which could not be imagined even in births to
come--that this was that love! So feeble was its support! No sooner does
the priesthood touch it than your "eternal" love crumbles into a handful
of dust! Only a short while ago Hemanta had whispered to her: "What a
beautiful night!" The same night was not yet at an end, the same yapiya
was still warbling, the same south breeze still blew into the roam,
making the bed-curtain shiver; the same moonlight lay on the bed next
the open window, sleeping like a beautiful heroine exhausted with
gaiety. All this was unreal! Love was more falsely dissembling than she
herself!

III

The next morning Hemanta, fagged after a sleepless night, and looking
like one distracted, called at the house of Peari Sankar Ghosal. "What
news, my son?" Peari Sankar greeted him.

Hemanta, flaring up like a big fire, said in a trembling voice: "You
have defiled our caste. You have brought destruction upon us. And you
will have to pay for it." He could say no more; he felt choked.

"And you have preserved my caste, presented my ostracism from the
community, and patted me on the back affectionately!" said Peari Sankar
with a slight sarcastic smile.

Hemanta wished that his Brahmin-fury could reduce Peari Sankar to ashes
in a moment, but his rage burnt only himself. Peari Sankar sat before
him unscathed, and in the best of health.

"Did I ever do you any harm?" demanded Hemanta in a broken voice.

"Let me ask you one question," said Peari Sankar. "My daughter--my only
child-what harm had she done your father? You were very young then,
and probably never heard. Listen, then. Now, don't you excite yourself.
There is much humour in what I am going to relate.

"You were quite small when my son-in-law Nabakanta ran away to England
after stealing my daughter's jewels. You might truly remember the
commotion in the village when he returned as a barrister five years
later. Or, perhaps, you were unaware of it, as you were at school in
Calcutta at the time. Your father, arrogating to himself the headship
of the community, declared that if I sent my daughter to her husband's
home, I must renounce her for good, and never again allow her to cross
my threshold. I fell at your father's feet, and implored him, saying:
'Brother, save me this once. I will make the boy swallow cow-dung, and
go through the prayaschittam ceremony. Do take him back into caste.' But
your father remained obdurate. For my part, I could not disown my only
child, and, bidding good-bye to my village and my kinsmen, I betook
myself to Calcutta. There, too, my troubles followed me. When I had made
every arrangement for my nephew's marriage, your father stirred up the
girl's people, and they broke the match off. Then I took a solemn vow
that, if there was a drop of Brahmin blood flowing in my veins, I would
avenge myself. You understand the business to some extent now, don't
you? But wait a little longer. You will enjoy it, when I tell you the
whole story; it is interesting.

"When you were attending college, one Bipradas Chatterji used to live
next door to your lodgings. The poor fellow is dead now. In his house
lived a child-widow called Kusum, the destitute orphan of a Kayestha
gentleman. The girl was very pretty, and the old Brahmin desired to
shield her from the hungry gaze of college students. But for a young
girl to throw dust in the eyes of her old guardian was not at all a
difficult task. She often went to the top of the roof, to hang her
washing out to dry, and, I believe, you found your own roof best suited
for your studies. Whether you two spoke to each other, when on your
respective roofs, I cannot tell, but the girl's behaviour excited
suspicion in the old man's mind. She made frequent mistakes in her
household duties, and, like Parbati (The wife of Shiva the Destroyer),
engaged in her devotions, began gradually to renounce food and sleep.
Some evenings she would burst into tears in the presence of the old
gentleman, without any apparent reason.

"At last he discovered that you two saw each other from the roofs pretty
frequently, and that you even went the length of absenting yourself from
college to sit on the roof at mid-day with a book in your hand, so
fond had you grown suddenly of solitary study. Bipradas came to me for
advice, and told me everything. 'Uncle,' said I to him, 'for a long
while you have cherished a desire to go on a pilgrimage to Benares. You
had better do it now, and leave the girl in my charge. I will take care
of her.'

"So he went. I lodged the girl in the house of Sripati Chatterji,
passing him off as her father. What happened next is known to you.
I feel a great relief to-day, having told you everything from the
beginning. It sounds like a romance, doesn't it? I think of turning it
into a book, and getting it printed. But I am not a writing-man myself.
They say my nephew has some aptitude that way--I will get him to write
it for me. But the best thing would be, if you would collaborate with
him, because the conclusion of the story is not known to me so well."

Without paying much attention to the concluding remarks of Peari Sankar,
Hemanta asked: "Did not Kusum object to this marriage?"

"Well," said Peari Sankar, "it is very difficult to guess. You know, my
boy, how women's minds are constituted. When they say 'no,' they mean
'yes.' During the first few days after her removal to the new home, she
went almost crazy at not seeing you. You, too, seemed to have discovered
her new address somehow, as you used to lose your way after starting for
college, and loiter about in front of Sripati's house. Your eyes did not
appear to be exactly in search of the Presidency College, as they were
directed towards the barred windows of a private house, through which
nothing but insects and the hearts of moon-struck young men could obtain
access. I felt very sorry for you both. I could see that your studies
were being seriously interrupted, and that the plight of the girl was
pitiable also.

"One day I called Kusum to me, and said: 'Listen to me, my daughter. I
am an old man, and you need feel no delicacy in my presence. I know whom
you desire at heart. The young man's condition is hopeless too. I wish I
could bring about your union.' At this Kusum suddenly melted into tears,
and ran away. On several evenings after that, I visited Sripati's house,
and, calling Kusum to me, discussed with her matters relating to you,
and so I succeeded in gradually overcoming her shyness. At last, when I
said that I would try to bring about a marriage, she asked me: 'How
can it be?' 'Never mind,' I said, 'I would pass you off as a Brahmin
maiden.' After a good deal of argument, she begged me to find out
whether you would approve of it. 'What nonsense,' replied I, 'the boy
is well-nigh mad as it were, what's the use of disclosing all these
complications to him? Let the ceremony be over smoothly and then--all's
well that ends well. Especially, as there is not the slightest risk of
its ever leaking out, why go out of the way to make a fellow miserable
for life?'

"I do not know whether the plan had Kusum's assent or not. At times she
wept, and at other times she remained silent. If I said, 'Let us drop it
then,' she would become very restless. When things were in this state, I
sent Sripati to you with the proposal of marriage; you consented without
a moment's hesitation. Everything was settled.

"Shortly before the day fixed, Kusum became so obstinate that I had
the greatest difficulty in bringing her round again. 'Do let it drop,
uncle,' she said to me constantly. 'What do you mean, you silly child,'
I rebuked her,' how can we back out now, when everything has been
settled?'

"'Spread a rumour that I am dead,' she implored. 'Send me away
somewhere.'

"'What would happen to the young man then?' said I.' He is now in the
seventh heaven of delight, expecting that his long cherished desire
would be fulfilled to-morrow; and to-day you want me to send him the
news of your death. The result would be that to-morrow I should have to
bear the news of his death to you, and the same evening your death
would be reported to me. Do you imagine, child, that I am capable of
committing a girl-murder and a Brahmin-murder at my age?'

"Eventually the happy marriage was celebrated at the auspicious moment,
and I felt relieved of a burdensome duty which I owed to myself. What
happened afterwards you know best."

"Couldn't you stop after having done us an irreparable injury?" burst
out Hemanta after a short silence. "Why have you told the secret now?"

With the utmost composure, Peari Sankar replied: "When I saw that all
arrangements had been made for the wedding of your sister, I said to
myself: 'Well, I have fouled the caste of one Brahmin, but that was only
from a sense of duty. Here, another Brahmin's caste is imperilled, and
this time it is my plain duty to prevent it.' So I wrote to them saying
that I was in a position to prove that you had taken the daughter of a
sudra to wife."

Controlling himself with a gigantic effort, Hemanta said: "What will
become of this girl whom I shall abandon now? Would you give her food
and shelter?"

"I have done what was mine to do," replied Peari Sankar calmly. "It is
no part of my duty to look after the discarded wives of other people.
Anybody there? Get a glass of cocoanut milk for Hemanta Babu with ice in
it. And some pan too."

Hemanta rose, and took his departure without waiting for this luxurious
hospitality.

IV

It was the fifth night of the waning of the moon--and the night was
dark. No birds were singing. The lichi tree by the tank looked like
a smudge of ink on a background a shade less deep. The south wind was
blindly roaming about in the darkness like a sleep-walker. The stars
in the sky with vigilant unblinking eyes were trying to penetrate the
darkness, in their effort to fathom some profound mystery.

No light shone in the bedroom. Hemanta was sitting on the side of the
bed next the open window, gazing at the darkness in front of him. Kusum
lay on the floor, clasping her husband's feet with both her arms,
and her face resting on them. Time stood like an ocean hushed into
stillness. On the background of eternal night, Fate seemed to have
painted this one single picture for all time--annihilation on every
side, the judge in the centre of it, and the guilty one at his feet.

The sound of slippers was heard again. Approaching the door, Harihar
Mukerji said: "You have had enough time,--I can't allow you more. Turn
the girl out of the house."

Kusum, as she heard this, embraced her husband's feet with all the
ardour of a lifetime, covered them with kisses, and touching her
forehead to them reverentially, withdrew herself.

Hemanta rose, and walking to the door, said: "Father, I won't forsake my
wife."

"What!" roared out Harihar, "would you lose your caste, sir?"

"I don't care for caste," was Hemanta's calm reply.

"Then you too I renounce."




THE CABULIWALLAH

(THE FRUITSELLER FROM CABUL)


My five years' old daughter Mini cannot live without chattering. I
really believe that in all her life she has not wasted a minute in
silence. Her mother is often vexed at this, and would stop her prattle,
but I would not. To see Mini quiet is unnatural, and I cannot bear it
long. And so my own talk with her is always lively.

One morning, for instance, when I was in the midst of the seventeenth
chapter of my new novel, my little Mini stole into the room, and putting
her hand into mine, said: "Father! Ramdayal the door-keeper calls a crow
a krow! He doesn't know anything, does he?"

Before I could explain to her the differences of language in this world,
she was embarked on the full tide of another subject. "What do you
think, Father? Bhola says there is an elephant in the clouds, blowing
water out of his trunk, and that is why it rains!"

And then, darting off anew, while I sat still making ready some reply to
this last saying, "Father! what relation is Mother to you?"

"My dear little sister in the law!" I murmured involuntarily to myself,
but with a grave face contrived to answer: "Go and play with Bhola,
Mini! I am busy!"

The window of my room overlooks the road. The child had seated herself
at my feet near my table, and was playing softly, drumming on her knees.
I was hard at work on my seventeenth chapter, where Protrap Singh, the
hero, had just caught Kanchanlata, the heroine, in his arms, and was
about to escape with her by the third story window of the castle, when
all of a sudden Mini left her play, and ran to the window, crying, "A
Cabuliwallah! a Cabuliwallah!" Sure enough in the street below was a
Cabuliwallah, passing slowly along. He wore the loose soiled clothing
of his people, with a tall turban; there was a bag on his back, and he
carried boxes of grapes in his hand.

I cannot tell what were my daughter's feelings at the sight of this man,
but she began to call him loudly. "Ah!" I thought, "he will come in, and
my seventeenth chapter will never be finished!" At which exact moment
the Cabuliwallah turned, and looked up at the child. When she saw
this, overcome by terror, she fled to her mother's protection, and
disappeared. She had a blind belief that inside the bag, which the
big man carried, there were perhaps two or three other children like
herself. The pedlar meanwhile entered my doorway, and greeted me with a
smiling face.

So precarious was the position of my hero and my heroine, that my first
impulse was to stop and buy something, since the man had been called. I
made some small purchases, and a conversation began about Abdurrahman,
the Russians, she English, and the Frontier Policy.

As he was about to leave, he asked: "And where is the little girl, sir?"

And I, thinking that Mini must get rid of her false fear, had her
brought out.

She stood by my chair, and looked at the Cabuliwallah and his bag. He
offered her nuts and raisins, but she would not be tempted, and only
clung the closer to me, with all her doubts increased.

This was their first meeting.

One morning, however, not many days later, as I was leaving the house, I
was startled to find Mini, seated on a bench near the door, laughing and
talking, with the great Cabuliwallah at her feet. In all her life, it
appeared; my small daughter had never found so patient a listener, save
her father. And already the corner of her little sari was stuffed with
almonds and raisins, the gift of her visitor, "Why did you give her
those?" I said, and taking out an eight-anna bit, I handed it to him.
The man accepted the money without demur, and slipped it into his
pocket.

Alas, on my return an hour later, I found the unfortunate coin had made
twice its own worth of trouble! For the Cabuliwallah had given it to
Mini, and her mother catching sight of the bright round object, had
pounced on the child with: "Where did you get that eight-anna bit?"

"The Cabuliwallah gave it me," said Mini cheerfully.

"The Cabuliwallah gave it you!" cried her mother much shocked. "Oh,
Mini! how could you take it from him?"

I, entering at the moment, saved her from impending disaster, and
proceeded to make my own inquiries.

It was not the first or second time, I found, that the two had met.
The Cabuliwallah had overcome the child's first terror by a judicious
bribery of nuts and almonds, and the two were now great friends.

They had many quaint jokes, which afforded them much amusement. Seated
in front of him, looking down on his gigantic frame in all her tiny
dignity, Mini would ripple her face with laughter, and begin: "O
Cabuliwallah, Cabuliwallah, what have you got in your bag?"

And he would reply, in the nasal accents of the mountaineer: "An
elephant!" Not much cause for merriment, perhaps; but how they both
enjoyed the witticism! And for me, this child's talk with a grown-up man
had always in it something strangely fascinating.

Then the Cabuliwallah, not to be behindhand, would take his turn: "Well,
little one, and when are you going to the father-in-law's house?"

Now most small Bengali maidens have heard long ago about the
father-in-law's house; but we, being a little new-fangled, had kept
these things from our child, and Mini at this question must have been
a trifle bewildered. But she would not show it, and with ready tact
replied: "Are you going there?"

Amongst men of the Cabuliwallah's class, however, it is well known that
the words father-in-law's house have a double meaning. It is a euphemism
for jail, the place where we are well cared for, at no expense to
ourselves. In this sense would the sturdy pedlar take my daughter's
question. "Ah," he would say, shaking his fist at an invisible
policeman, "I will thrash my father-in-law!" Hearing this, and picturing
the poor discomfited relative, Mini would go off into peals of laughter,
in which her formidable friend would join.

These were autumn mornings, the very time of year when kings of old
went forth to conquest; and I, never stirring from my little corner in
Calcutta, would let my mind wander over the whole world. At the very
name of another country, my heart would go out to it, and at the sight
of a foreigner in the streets, I would fall to weaving a network of
dreams,--the mountains, the glens, and the forests of his distant home,
with his cottage in its setting, and the free and independent life
of far-away wilds. Perhaps the scenes of travel conjure themselves up
before me, and pass and repass in my imagination all the more vividly,
because I lead such a vegetable existence, that a call to travel would
fall upon me like a thunderbolt. In the presence of this Cabuliwallah,
I was immediately transported to the foot of arid mountain peaks,
with narrow little defiles twisting in and out amongst their towering
heights. I could see the string of camels bearing the merchandise, and
the company of turbaned merchants, carrying some of their queer old
firearms, and some of their spears, journeying downward towards
the plains. I could see--but at some such point Mini's mother would
intervene, imploring me to "beware of that man."

Mini's mother is unfortunately a very timid lady. Whenever she hears a
noise in the street, or sees people coming towards the house, she always
jumps to the conclusion that they are either thieves, or drunkards, or
snakes, or tigers, or malaria or cockroaches, or caterpillars, or an
English sailor. Even after all these years of experience, she is
not able to overcome her terror. So she was full of doubts about the
Cabuliwallah, and used to beg me to keep a watchful eye on him.

I tried to laugh her fear gently away, but then she would turn round on
me seriously, and ask me solemn questions.

Were children never kidnapped?

Was it, then, not true that there was slavery in Cabul?

Was it so very absurd that this big man should be able to carry off a
tiny child?

I urged that, though not impossible, it was highly improbable. But this
was not enough, and her dread persisted. As it was indefinite, however,
it did not seem right to forbid the man the house, and the intimacy went
on unchecked.

Once a year in the middle of January Rahmun, the Cabuliwallah, was in
the habit of returning to his country, and as the time approached he
would be very busy, going from house to house collecting his debts. This
year, however, he could always find time to come and see Mini. It would
have seemed to an outsider that there was some conspiracy between the
two, for when he could not come in the morning, he would appear in the
evening.

Even to me it was a little startling now and then, in the corner of
a dark room, suddenly to surprise this tall, loose-garmented, much
bebagged man; but when Mini would run in smiling, with her, "O!
Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" and the two friends, so far apart in
age, would subside into their old laughter and their old jokes, I felt
reassured.

One morning, a few days before he had made up his mind to go, I was
correcting my proof sheets in my study. It was chilly weather. Through
the window the rays of the sun touched my feet, and the slight warmth
was very welcome. It was almost eight o'clock, and the early pedestrians
were returning home, with their heads covered. All at once, I heard an
uproar in the street, and, looking out, saw Rahmun being led away bound
between two policemen, and behind them a crowd of curious boys. There
were blood-stains on the clothes of the Cabuliwallah, and one of the
policemen carried a knife. Hurrying out, I stopped them, and enquired
what it all meant. Partly from one, partly from another, I gathered that
a certain neighbour had owed the pedlar something for a Rampuri shawl,
but had falsely denied having bought it, and that in the course of the
quarrel, Rahmun had struck him. Now in the heat of his excitement, the
prisoner began calling his enemy all sorts of names, when suddenly in
a verandah of my house appeared my little Mini, with her usual
exclamation: "O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" Rahmun's face lighted up
as he turned to her. He had no bag under his arm today, so she could not
discuss the elephant with him. She at once therefore proceeded to the
next question: "Are you going to the father-in-law's house?" Rahmun
laughed and said: "Just where I am going, little one!" Then seeing that
the reply did not amuse the child, he held up his fettered hands. "Ali,"
he said, "I would have thrashed that old father-in-law, but my hands are
bound!"

On a charge of murderous assault, Rahmun was sentenced to some years'
imprisonment.

Time passed away, and he was not remembered. The accustomed work in the
accustomed place was ours, and the thought of the once-free mountaineer
spending his years in prison seldom or never occurred to us. Even my
light-hearted Mini, I am ashamed to say, forgot her old friend. New
companions filled her life. As she grew older, she spent more of her
time with girls. So much time indeed did she spend with them that she
came no more, as she used to do, to her father's room. I was scarcely on
speaking terms with her.

Years had passed away. It was once more autumn and we had made
arrangements for our Mini's marriage. It was to take place during the
Puja Holidays. With Durga returning to Kailas, the light of our home
also was to depart to her husband's house, and leave her father's in the
shadow.

The morning was bright. After the rains, there was a sense of ablution
in the air, and the sun-rays looked like pure gold. So bright were they
that they gave a beautiful radiance even to the sordid brick walls of
our Calcutta lanes. Since early dawn to-day the wedding-pipes had been
sounding, and at each beat my own heart throbbed. The wail of the tune,
Bhairavi, seemed to intensify my pain at the approaching separation. My
Mini was to be married to-night.

From early morning noise and bustle had pervaded the house. In
the courtyard the canopy had to be slung on its bamboo poles; the
chandeliers with their tinkling sound must be hung in each room and
verandah. There was no end of hurry and excitement. I was sitting in
my study, looking through the accounts, when some one entered, saluting
respectfully, and stood before me. It was Rahmun the Cabuliwallah. At
first I did not recognise him. He had no bag, nor the long hair, nor the
same vigour that he used to have. But he smiled, and I knew him again.

"When did you come, Rahmun?" I asked him.

"Last evening," he said, "I was released from jail."

The words struck harsh upon my ears. I had never before talked with one
who had wounded his fellow, and my heart shrank within itself, when I
realised this, for I felt that the day would have been better-omened had
he not turned up.

"There are ceremonies going on," I said, "and I am busy. Could you
perhaps come another day?"

At once he turned to go; but as he reached the door he hesitated, and
said: "May I not see the little one, sir, for a moment?" It was his
belief that Mini was still the same. He had pictured her running to him
as she used, calling "O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" He had imagined
too that they would laugh and talk together, just as of old. In fact, in
memory of former days he had brought, carefully wrapped up in paper, a
few almonds and raisins and grapes, obtained somehow from a countryman,
for his own little fund was dispersed.

I said again: "There is a ceremony in the house, and you will not be
able to see any one to-day."

The man's face fell. He looked wistfully at me for a moment, said "Good
morning," and went out. I felt a little sorry, and would have called him
back, but I found he was returning of his own accord. He came close up
to me holding out his offerings and said: "I brought these few things,
sir, for the little one. Will you give them to her?"

I took them and was going to pay him, but he caught my hand and said:
"You are very kind, sir! Keep me in your recollection. Do not offer me
money!--You have a little girl, I too have one like her in my own home.
I think of her, and bring fruits to your child, not to make a profit for
myself."

Saying this, he put his hand inside his big loose robe, and brought out
a small and dirty piece of paper. With great care he unfolded this, and
smoothed it out with both hands on my table. It bore the impression of
a little band. Not a photograph. Not a drawing. The impression of an
ink-smeared hand laid flat on the paper. This touch of his own little
daughter had been always on his heart, as he had come year after year to
Calcutta, to sell his wares in the streets.

Tears came to my eyes. I forgot that he was a poor Cabuli fruit-seller,
while I was--but no, what was I more than he? He also was a father. That
impression of the hand of his little Parbati in her distant mountain
home reminded me of my own little Mini.

I sent for Mini immediately from the inner apartment. Many difficulties
were raised, but I would not listen. Clad in the red silk of her
wedding-day, with the sandal paste on her forehead, and adorned as a
young bride, Mini came, and stood bashfully before me.

The Cabuliwallah looked a little staggered at the apparition. He could
not revive their old friendship. At last he smiled and said: "Little
one, are you going to your father-in-law's house?"

But Mini now understood the meaning of the word "father-in-law," and she
could not reply to him as of old. She flushed up at the question, and
stood before him with her bride-like face turned down.

I remembered the day when the Cabuliwallah and my Mini had first met,
and I felt sad. When she had gone, Rahmun heaved a deep sigh, and sat
down on the floor. The idea had suddenly come to him that his daughter
too must have grown in this long time, and that he would have to make
friends with her anew. Assuredly he would not find her, as he used to
know her. And besides, what might not have happened to her in these
eight years?

The marriage-pipes sounded, and the mild autumn sun streamed round
us. But Rahmun sat in the little Calcutta lane, and saw before him the
barren mountains of Afghanistan.

I took out a bank-note, and gave it to him, saying: "Go back to your
own daughter, Rahmun, in your own country, and may the happiness of your
meeting bring good fortune to my child!"

Having made this present, I had to curtail some of the festivities.
I could not have the electric lights I had intended, nor the military
band, and the ladies of the house were despondent at it. But to me the
wedding feast was all the brighter for the thought that in a distant
land a long-lost father met again with his only child.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNGRY STONES, AND OTHER STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The King of the Dark Chamber
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The King of the Dark Chamber

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6521]
                Most recently updated: December 29, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred
        This eBook was produced by Chetan K Jain.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING OF THE DARK CHAMBER ***



Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred
This eBook was produced by Chetan K Jain.




The King of the Dark Chamber


By Rabindranath Tagore


[Translated from Bengali to English by Kshitish Chandra Sen]


[New York: The Macmillan Company, 1914;
Copyright, 1914, by Drama League of America,
by The Macmillan Company]




I


[A street.  A few wayfarers, and a CITY GUARD]

FIRST MAN.  Ho, Sir!

CITY GUARD.  What do you want?

SECOND MAN.  Which way should we go?  We are strangers here.
Please tell us which street we should take.

CITY GUARD.  Where do you want to go?

THIRD MAN.  To where those big festivities are going to be held,
you know.  Which way do we go?

CITY GUARD.  One street is quite as good as another here.  Any
street will lead you there.  Go straight ahead, and you cannot
miss the place.  [Exit.]

FIRST MAN.  Just hear what the fool says: "Any street will lead
you there!"  Where, then, would be the sense of having so many
streets?

SECOND MAN.  You needn't be so awfully put out at that, my man.
A country is free to arrange its affairs in its own way.  As for
roads in our country--well, they are as good as non-existent;
narrow and crooked lanes, a labyrinth of ruts and tracks.  Our
King does not believe in open thoroughfares; he thinks that
streets are just so many openings for his subjects to fly away
from his kingdom.  It is quite the contrary here; nobody stands
in your way, nobody objects to your going elsewhere if you like
to; and yet the people are far from deserting this kingdom.  With
such streets our country would certainly have been depopulated in
no time.

FIRST MAN.  My dear Janardan, I have always noticed that this is
a great fault in your character.

JANARDAN.  What is?

FIRST MAN.  That you are always having a fling at your country.
How can you think that open highways may be good for a country?
Look here, Kaundilya; here is a man who actually believes that
open highways are the salvation of a country.

KAUNDILYA.  There is no need, Bhavadatta, of my pointing out
afresh that Janardan is blessed with an intelligence which is
remarkably crooked, which is sure to land him in danger some day.
If the King comes to hear of our worthy friend, he will make it a
pretty hard job for him to find any one to do him his funeral
rites when he is dead.

BHAVADATTA.  One can't help feeling that life becomes a burden in
this country; one misses the joys of privacy in these streets--
this jostling and brushing shoulders with strange people day and
night makes one long for a bath.  And nobody can tell exactly
what kind of people you are meeting with in these public roads--
ugh!

KAUNDILYA.  And it is Janardan who persuaded us to come to this
precious country!  We never had any second person like him in our
family.  You knew my father, of course; he was a great man, a
pious man if ever there was one.  He spent his whole life within
a circle of a radius of 49 cubits drawn with a rigid adherence to
the injunctions of the scriptures, and never for a single day did
he cross this circle.  After his death a serious difficulty
arose--how cremate him within the limits of the 49 cubits and yet
outside the house?  At length the priests decided that though we
could not go beyond the scriptural number, the only way out of
the difficulty was to reverse the figure and make it 94 cubits;
only thus could we cremate him outside the house without
violating the sacred books.  My word, that was strict observance!
Ours is indeed no common country.

BHAVADATTA.  And yet, though Janardan comes from the very same
soil, he thinks it wise to declare that open highways are best
for a country.

[Enter GRANDFATHER with a band of boys]

GRANDFATHER.  Boys, we will have to vie with the wild breeze of
the south to-day--and we are not going to be beaten.  We will
sing till we have flooded all streets with our mirth and song.

SONG.

/*
  The southern gate is unbarred.  Come, my spring, come!
  Thou wilt swing at the swing of my heart, come, my spring,
    come!
  Come in the lisping leaves, in the youthful surrender of
    flowers;
  Come in the flute songs and the wistful sighs of the woodlands!
  Let your unfastened robe wildly flap in the drunken wind!
    Come, my spring, come!
*/

[Exeunt.]

[Enter a band of CITIZENS]

FIRST CITIZEN.  After all, one cannot help wishing that the King
had allowed himself to be seen at least this one day.  What a
great pity, to live in his kingdom and yet not to have seen him
for a single day!

SECOND CITIZEN.  If you only knew the real meaning of all this
mystery!  I could tell you if you would keep a secret.

FIRST CITIZEN.  My dear fellow, we both live in the same quarter
of the town, but have you ever known me letting out any man s
secret?  Of course, that matter of your brother's finding a
hidden fortune while digging for a well--well, you know well
enough why I had to give it out.  You know all the facts.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Of course I know.  And it is because I know that
I ask, could you keep a secret if I tell you?  It may mean
ruination to us all, you know, if you once let it out.

THIRD CITIZEN.  You are a nice man, after all, Virupaksha!  Why
are you so anxious to bring down a disaster which as yet only may
happen?  Who will be responsible for keeping your secret all his
life?

VIRUPAKSHA.  It is only because the topic came up--well, then, I
shall not say anything.  I am not the man to say things for
nothing.  You had yourself brought up the question that the King
never showed himself; and I only remarked that it was not for
nothing that the King shut himself up from the public gaze.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Pray do tell us why, Virupaksha.

VIRUPAKSHA.  Of course I don't mind telling you--for we are all
good friends, aren't we?  There can be no harm.  (With a low
voice.) The King--is--hideous to look at, so he has made up his
mind never to show himself to his subjects.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Ha! that's it!  It must be so.  We have always
wondered ...  why, the mere sight of a King in all countries
makes one's soul quake like an aspen leaf with fear; but why
should our King never have been seen by any mortal soul?  Even if
he at least came out and consigned us all to the gibbet, we might
be sure that our King was no hoax.  After all, there is much in
Virupaksha's explanation that sounds plausible enough.

THIRD CITIZEN.  Not a bit--I don't believe in a syllable of it.

VIRUPAKSHA.  What, Vishu, do you mean to say that I am a liar?

VISHU.  I don't exactly mean that--but I cannot accept your
theory.  Excuse me, I cannot help if I seem a bit rude or
churlish.

VIRUPAKSHA.  Small wonder that you can't believe my words--you
who think yourself sage enough to reject the opinions of your
parents and superiors.  How long do you think you could have
stayed in this country if the King did not remain in hiding?  You
are no better than a flagrant heretic.

VISHU.  My dear pillar of orthodoxy!  Do you think any other King
would have hesitated to cut off your tongue and make it food for
dogs?  And you have the face to say that our King is horrid to
look at!

VIRUPAKSHA.  Look here, Vishu.  will you curb your tongue?

VISHU.  It would be superfluous to point out whose tongue needs
the curbing.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Hush, my dear friends--this looks rather bad....
It seems as if they are resolved to put me in danger as well.  I
am not going to be a party to all this.[Exit.]

[Enter a number of men, dragging in GRANDFATHER, in boisterous
exuberance]

SECOND CITIZEN.  Grandpa, something strikes me to-day ...

GRANDFATHER.  What is it?

SECOND CITIZEN.  This year every country has sent its people to
our festival, but every one asks, "Everything is nice and
beautiful--but where is your King?"  and we do not know what to
answer.  That is the one big gap which cannot but make itself
felt to every one in our country.

GRANDFATHER.  "Gap," do you say!  Why, the whole country is all
filled and crammed and packed with the King: and you call him a
"gap"!  Why,he has made every one of us a crowned King!

SINGS.

/*
  We are all Kings in the kingdom of our King.
  Were it not so, how could we hope in our heart to meet him!
  We do what we like, yet we do what he likes;
  We are not bound with the chain of fear at the feet of a slave-
    owning King.
  Were it not so, how could we hope in our heart to meet him!
  Our King honours each one of us, thus honours his own very
    self.
  No littleness can keep us shut up in its walls of untruth for
    aye.
  Were it not so, how could we have hope in our heart to meet
    him!
  We struggle and dig our own path, thus reach his path at the
    end.
  We can never get lost in the abyss of dark night.
  Were it not so, how could we hope in our heart to meet him!
*/

THIRD CITIZEN.  But, really, I cannot stand the absurd things
people say about our King simply because he is not seen in
public.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Just fancy!  Any one libelling me can be
punished, while nobody can stop the mouth of any rascal who
chooses to slander the King.

GRANDFATHER.  The slander cannot touch the King.  With a mere
breath you can blow out the flame which a lamp inherits from the
sun, but if all the world blow upon the sun itself its effulgence
remains undimmed and unimpaired as before.

[Enter VISHVAVASU and VIRUPAKSHA]

VISHU.  Here's Grandfather!  Look here, this man is going about
telling everybody that our King does not come out because he is
ugly.

GRANDFATHER.  But why does that make you angry, Vishu?  His King
must be ugly, because how else could Virupaksha possess such
features in his kingdom?  He fashions his King after the image of
himself he sees in the mirror.

VIRUPAKSHA.  Grandfather, I shall mention no names, but nobody
would think of disbelieving the person who gave me the news.

GRANDFATHER.  Who could be a higher authority than yourself!

VIRUPAKSHA.  But I could give you proofs ...

FIRST CITIZEN.  The impudence of this fellow knows no bounds!
Not content with spreading a ghastly rumour with an unabashed
face, he offers to measure his lies with insolence!

SECOND CITIZEN.  Why not make him measure his length on the
ground?

GRANDFATHER.  Why so much heat, my friends?  The poor fellow is
going to have his own festive day by singing the ugliness of his
King.  Go along, Virupaksha, you will find plenty of people ready
to believe you: may you be happy in their company.[Exeunt.]

[Re-enter the party of FOREIGNERS]

BHAVADATTA.  It strikes me, Kaundilya, that these people haven't
got a King at all.  They have somehow managed to keep the rumour
afloat.

KAUNDILYA.  You are right, I think.  We all know that the supreme
thing that strikes one's eye in any country is the King, who of
course loses no opportunity of exhibiting himself.

JANARDAN.  But look at the nice order and regularity prevailing
all over the place--how do you explain it without a King?

BHAVADATTA.  So this is the wisdom you have arrived at by living
so long under a ruler!  Where would be the necessity of having a
King if order and harmony existed already?

JANARDAN.  All these people have assembled to rejoice at this
festival.  Do you think they could come together like this in a
country of anarchy?

BHAVADATTA.  My dear Janardan, you are evading the real issue, as
usual.  There can be no question about the order and regularity,
and the festive rejoicing too is plain enough: there is no
difficulty so far.  But where is the King?  Have you seen him?
Just tell us that.

JANARDAN.  What I want to say is this: you know from your
experience that there can be chaos and anarchy even if a King be
present: but what do we see here?

KAUNDILYA.  You are always coming back to your quibbling.  Why
can you not give a straight answer to Bhavadatta's question--Have
you, or have you not, seen the King?  Yes or no?  [Exeunt.]

[Enter a band of MEN, singing]

SONG.

/*
  My beloved is ever in my heart
    That is why I see him everywhere,
  He is in the pupils of my eyes
    That is why I see him everywhere.
  I went far away to hear his own words,
    But, ah, it was vain!
  When I came back I heard them
    In my own songs.
  Who are you who seek him like a beggar
    from door to door!
  Come to my heart and see his face in the
    tears of my eyes!
*/

[Enter HERALDS and ADVANCE GUARDS of the KING]

FIRST HERALD.  Stand off!  Get away from the street, all of you!

FIRST CITIZEN.  Eh, man, who do you think you are?  You weren't
of course born with such lofty strides, my friend?--Why should we
stand off, my dear sir?  Why should we budge?  Are we street
dogs, or what?

SECOND HERALD.  Our King is coming this way.

SECOND CITIZEN.  King?  Which King?

FIRST HERALD.  Our King, the King of this country.

FIRST CITIZEN.  What, is the fellow mad?  Whoever heard of our
King coming out heralded by these vociferous gentry?

SECOND HERALD.  The King will no longer deny himself to his
subjects.  He is coming to command the festivities himself.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Brother, is that so?

SECOND HERALD.  Look, his banner is flying over there.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Ah, yes, that is a flag indeed.

SECOND HERALD.  Do you see the red <i>Kimshuk</i> flower
painted on it?

SECOND CITIZEN.  Yes, yes, it is the <i>Kimshuk</i>
indeed!--what a bright scarlet flower!

FIRST HERALD.  Well!  do you believe us now?

SECOND CITIZEN.  I never said I didn't.  That fellow Kumbha
started all this fuss.  Did I say a word?

FIRST HERALD.  Perhaps, though a pot-bellied man, he is quite
empty inside; an empty vessel sounds most, you know.

SECOND HERALD.  Who is he?  Is he any kinsman of yours?

SECOND CITIZEN.  Not at all.  He is just a cousin of our village
chief's father-in-law, and he does not even live in the same part
of our village with us.

SECOND HERALD.  Just so: he quite looks the seventh cousin of
somebody's father-in-law, and his understanding appears also to
bear the stamp of uncle-in-lawhood.

KUMBHA.  Alas, my friends, many a bitter sorrow has given my poor
mind a twist before it has become like this.  It is only the
other day that a King came and paraded the streets, with as many
titles in front of him as the drums that made the town hideous by
their din, ...  What did I not do to serve and please him!  I
rained presents on him, I hung about him like a beggar--and in
the end I found the strain on my resources too hard to bear.  But
what was the end of all that pomp and majesty?  When people
sought grants and presents from him, he could not somehow
discover an auspicious day in the Calendar: though all days were
red-letter days when we had to pay our taxes!

SECOND HERALD.  Do you mean to insinuate that our King is a bogus
King like the one you have described?

FIRST HERALD.  Mr.  Uncle-in-law, I believe the time has come for
you to say good-bye to Aunty-in-law.

KUMBHA.  Please, sirs, do not take any offence.  I am a poor
creature--my sincerest apologies, sirs: I will do anything to be
excused.  I am quite willing to move away as far as you like.

SECOND HERALD.  All right, come here and form a line.  The King
will come just now--we shall go and prepare the way for him.
[They go out.]

SECOND CITIZEN.  My dear Kumbha, your tongue will be your death
one day.

KUMBHA.  Friend Madhav, it isn't my tongue, it is fate.  When the
bogus King appeared I never said a word, though that did not
prevent my striking at my own feet with all the self-confidence
of innocence.  And now, when perhaps the real King has come, I
simply must blurt out treason.  It is fate, my dear friend!

MADHAV.  My faith is, to go on obeying the King--it does not
matter whether he is a real one or a pretender.  What do we know
of Kings that we should judge them!  It is like throwing stones
in the dark--you are almost sure of hitting your mark.  I go on
obeying and acknowledging--if it is a real King, well and good:
if not, what harm is there?

KUMBHA.  I should not have minded if the stones were nothing
better than stones.  But they are often precious things: here, as
elsewhere, extravagance lands us in poverty, my friend.

MADHAV.  Look!  There comes the King!  Ah, a King indeed!  What a
figure, what a face!  Whoever saw such beauty--lily-white,
creamy-soft!  What now, Kumbha?  What do you think now?

KUMBHA.  He looks all right--yes, he may be the real King for all
I know.

MADHAV.  He looks as if he were moulded and carved for kingship,
a figure too exquisite and delicate for the common light of day.

[Enter the "KING"]

[Transcriber's note: The author indicates the trumped up King as
"KING" in this play, enclosing the word King in double quotes to
help us distinguish the imposter from the real one.]

MADHAV.  Prosperity and victory attend thee, O King!  We have
been standing here to have a sight of thee since the early
morning.  Forget us not, your Majesty, in your favours.

KUMBHA.  The mystery deepens.  I will go and call
Grandfather.[Goes out.]

[Enter another band of MEN]

FIRST MAN.  The King, the King!  Come along, quick, the King is
passing this way.

SECOND MAN.  Do not forget me, O King!  I am Vivajadatta, the
grandson of Udayadatta of Kushalivastu.  I came here at the first
report of thy coming--I did not stop to hear what people were
saying: all the loyalty in me went out towards thee, O Monarch,
and brought me here.

THIRD MAN.  Rubbish!  I came here earlier than you--before the
cockcrow.  Where were you then?  O King, I am Bhadrasena, of
Vikramasthali.  Deign to keep thy servant in thy memory!

"KING".  I am much pleased with your loyalty and devotion.

VIVAJADATTA.  Your Majesty, many are the grievances and
complaints we have to make to thee: to whom could we turn our
prayers so long, when we could not approach thy august presence?

"KING".  Your grievances will all be redressed.  [Exit.]

FIRST MAN.  It won't do to lag behind, boys--the King will lose
sight of us if we get mixed up with the mob.

SECOND MAN.  See there-look what that fool Narottam is doing!  He
has elbowed his way through all of us and is now sedulously
fanning the King with a palm leaf!

MADHAV.  Indeed!  Well, well, the sheer audacity of the man takes
one's breath away.

SECOND MAN.  We shall have to pitch the fellow out of that
place--is he fit to stand beside the King?

MADHAV.  Do you imagine the King will not see through him?  His
loyalty is obviously a little too showy and profuse.

FIRST MAN.  Nonsense!  Kings can't scent hypocrites as we do--I
should not be surprised if the King be taken in by that fool's
strenuous fanning.

[Enter KUMBHA with GRANDFATHER]

KUMBHA.  I tell you--he has just passed by this street.

GRANDFATHER.  Is that a very infallible test of Kingship?

KUMBHA.  Oh no, he did not pass unobserved: not one or two men
but hundreds and thousands on both sides of the street have seen
him with their own eyes.

GRANDFATHER.  That is exactly what makes the whole affair
suspicious.  When ever has our King set out to dazzle the eyes of
the people by pomp and pageantry?  He is not the King to make
such a thundering row over his progress through the country.

KUMBHA.  But he may just have chosen to do so on this important
occasion: you cannot really tell.

GRANDFATHER.  Oh yes, you can!  My King cherishes no weathercock
fancy, no fantastic vein.

KUMBHA.  But, Grandfather, I wish I could only describe him!  So
soft, so delicate and exquisite like a waxen doll!  As I looked
on him, I yearned to shelter him from the sun, to protect him
with my whole body.

GRANDFATHER.  Fool, O precious ass that you are!  <i>My</i> King
a waxen doll, and you to protect him!

KUMBHA.  But seriously, Grandpa, he is a superb god, a miracle of
beauty: I do not find a single other figure in this vast assembly
that can stand beside his peerless loveliness.

GRANDFATHER.  If my King chose to make himself shown, your eyes
would not have noticed him.  He would not stand out like that
amongst others--he is one of the people, he mingles with the
common populace.

KUMBHA.  But did I not tell you I saw his banner?

GRANDFATHER.  What did you see displayed on his banner?

KUMBHA.  It had a red <i>Kimshuk</i> flower painted on it--the
bright and glittering scarlet dazzled my eyes.

GRANDFATHER.  <i>My</i> King has a thunderbolt within a lotus
painted on his flag.

KUMBHA.  But every one is saying, the King is out in this
festival: <i>every one</i>.

GRANDFATHER.  Why, so he is, of course: but he has no heralds, no
army, no retinue, no music bands or lights to accompany him.

KUMBHA.  So none could recognise him in his incognito, it seems.

GRANDFATHER.  Perhaps there are a few that can.

KUMBHA.  And those that can recognise him--does the King grant
them whatever they ask for?

GRANDFATHER.  But they never ask for anything.  No beggar will
ever know the King.  The greater beggar appears like the King to
the eyes of the lesser beggar.  O fool, the man that has come out
to-day attired in crimson and gold to beg from you--it is him
whom you are trumpeting as your King!  ...  Ah, there comes my
mad friend!  Oh come, my brothers!  we cannot spend the day in
idle wrangling and prating--let us now have some mad frolic, some
wild enjoyment!

[Enter the MAD FRIEND, who sings]

/*
  Do you smile, my friends?  Do you laugh, my brothers?  I roam
    in search of the golden stag!  Ah yes, the fleet-foot vision
    that ever eludes me!

  Oh, he flits and glimpses like a flash and then is gone, the
    untamed rover of the wilds!  Approach him and he is afar in a
    trice, leaving a cloud of haze and dust before thy eyes!

  Yet I roam in search of the golden stag, though I may never
    catch him in these wilds!  Oh, I roam and wander through
    woods and fields and nameless lands like a restless vagabond,
    never caring to turn my back.

  You all come and buy in the marketplace and go back to your
    homes laden with goods and provisions: but me the wild winds
    of unscalable heights have touched and kissed--Oh, I know not
    when or where!

  I have parted with my all to get what never has become mine!
    And yet think my moanings and my tears are for the things I
    thus have lost!

  With a laugh and a song in my heart I have left all sorrow and
    grief far behind me: Oh, I roam and wander through woods and
    fields and nameless lands--never caring to turn my vagabond's
    back!
*/




II


[A DarkChamber.  QUEEN SUDARSHANA.  Her Maid of Honour,
SURANGAMA]

SUDARSHANA.  Light, light!  Where is light?  Will the lamp never
be lighted in this chamber?

SURANGAMA.  My Queen, all your other rooms are lighted--will you
never long to escape from the light into a dark room like this?

SUDARSHANA.  But why should this room be kept dark?

SURANGAMA.  Because otherwise you would know neither light nor
darkness.

SUDARSHANA.  Living in this dark room you have grown to speak
darkly and strangely--I cannot understand you, Surangama.  But
tell me, in what part of the palace is this chamber situated?  I
cannot make out either the entrance or the way out of this room.

SURANGAMA.  This room is placed deep down, in the very heart of
the earth.  The King has built this room specially for your sake.

SUDARSHANA.  Why, he has no dearth of rooms--why need he have
made this chamber of darkness specially for me?

SURANGAMA.  You can meet others in the lighted rooms: but only in
this dark room can you meet your lord.

SUDARSHANA.  No, no--I cannot live without light--I am restless
in this stifling dark.  Surangama, if you can bring a light into
this room, I shall give you this necklace of mine.

SURANGAMA.  It is not in my power, O Queen.  How can I bring
light to a place which he would have kept always dark!

SUDARSHANA.  Strange devotion!  And yet, is it not true that the
King punished your father?

SURANGAMA.  Yes, that is true.  My father used to gamble.  All
the young men of the country used to gather at my father's
house-and they used to drink and gamble.

SUDARSHANA.  And when the King sent away your father in exile,
did it not make you feel bitterly oppressed?

SURANGAMA.  Oh, it made me quite furious.  I was on the road to
ruin and destruction: when that path was closed for me, I seemed
left without any support, without any succour or shelter.  I
raged and raved like a wild beast in a cage--how I wanted to tear
every one to pieces in my powerless anger!

SUDARSHANA.  But how did you get this devotion towards that same
King?

SURANGAMA .  How can I tell?  Perhaps I could rely and depend on
him because he was so hard, so pitiless!

SUDARSHANA.  When did this change of feeling take place?

SURANGAMA.  I could not tell you--I do not know that myself.  A
day came when all the rebel in me knew itself beaten, and then my
whole nature bowed down in humble resignation on the dust of the
earth.  And then I saw ...  I saw that he was as matchless in
beauty as in terror.  Oh.  I was saved, I was rescued.

SUDARSHANA.  Tell me, Surangama, I implore you, won't you tell me
what is the King like to look at?  I have not seen him yet for a
single day.  He comes to me in darkness, and leaves me in this
dark room again.  How many people have I not asked--but they all
return vague and dark answers--it seems to me that they all keep
back something.

SURANGAMA.  To tell you the truth, Queen, I could not say well
what he is like.  No--he is not what men call handsome.

SUDARSHANA.  You don't say so?  Not handsome!

SURANGAMA.  No, my Queen, he is not handsome.  To call him
beautiful would be to say far too little about him.

SUDARSHANA.  All your words are like that--dark, strange, and
vague.  I cannot understand what you mean.

SURANGAMA.  No, I will not call him handsome.  And it is because
he is not beautiful that he is so wonderful, so superb, so
miraculous!

SUDARSHANA.  I do not quite understand you--though I like to hear
you talk about him.  But I must see him at any cost.  I do not
even remember the day when I was married to him.  I have heard
mother say that a wise man came before my marriage and said, "He
who will wed your daughter is without a second on this earth."
How often have I asked her to describe his appearance to me, but
she only answers vaguely, and says she cannot say--she saw him
through a veil, faintly and obscurely.  But if he is the best
among men, how can I sit still without seeing him?

SURANGAMA.  Do you not feel a faint breeze blowing?

SUDARSHANA.  A breeze?  Where?

SURANGAMA.  Do you not smell a soft perfume?

SUDARSHANA.  No, I don't.

SURANGAMA.  The large door has opened ...  he is coming; my King
is coming in.

SUDARSHANA.  How can you perceive when he comes?

SURANGAMA.  I cannot say: I seem to hear his footsteps in my own
heart.  Being his servant of this dark chamber, I have developed
a sense--I can know and feel without seeing.

SUDARSHANA.  Would that I had this sense too, Surangama!

SURANGAMA.  You will have it, O Queen ...  this sense will awaken
in you one day.  Your longing to have a sight of him makes you
restless, and therefore all your mind is strained and warped in
that direction.  When you are past this state of feverish
restlessness, everything will become quite easy.

SUDARSHANA.  How is it that it is easy to you, who are a servant,
and so difficult to me, the Queen?

SURANGAMA.  It is because I am a mere servant that no difficulty
baulks me.  On the first day, when he left this room to my care,
saying, "Surangama, you will always keep this chamber ready for
me: this is all your task," then I did not say, even in thought,
"Oh, give me the work of those who keep the other rooms lighted."
No, but as soon as I bent all my mind to my task, a power woke
and grew within me, and mastered every part of me unopposed....
Oh, there he comes!  ...  he is standing outside, before the
door.  Lord!  O King!

SONG outside.

/*
  Open your door.  I am waiting.
  The ferry of the light from the dawn to the dark is done for
    the day,
    The evening star is up.
  Have you gathered your flowers, braided your hair,
    And donned your white robe for the night?
  The cattle have come to their folds and birds to their nests.
  The cross paths that run to all quarters have merged into one
    in the dark.
    Open your door.  I am waiting.
*/

SURANGAMA.  O King, who can keep thy own doors shut against thee?
They are not locked or bolted--they will swing wide open if you
only touch them with thy fingers.  Wilt thou not even touch them?
Wilt thou not enter unless I go and open the doors?

SONG.

/*
  At a breath you can remove my veils, my lord!
  If I fall asleep on the dust and hear not your call, would you
    wait till I wake?
  Would not the thunder of your chariot wheel make the earth
    tremble?
  Would you not burst open the door and enter your own house
    unbidden?
*/

Then do you go, O Queen, and open the door for him: he will not
enter otherwise.

SUDARSHANA.  I do not see anything distinctly in the dark--I do
not know where the doors are.  You know everything here--go and
open the doors for me.

[SURANGAMA opens the door, bows to the KING, and goes out.  The
KING will remain invisible throughout this play.]

SUDARSHANA.  Why do you not allow me to see you in the light?

KING.  So you want to see me in the midst of a thousand things in
broad daylight!  Why should I not be the only thing you can feel
in this darkness?

SUDARSHANA.  But I must see you--I am longing to have a sight of
you.

KING.  You will not be able to bear the sight of me--it will only
give you pain, poignant and overpowering.

SUDARSHANA.  How can you say that I shall be unable to bear your
sight?  Oh, I can feel even in this dark how lovely and wonderful
you are: why should I be afraid of you in the light?  But tell
me, can you see me in the dark?

KING.  Yes, I can.

SUDARSHANA.  What do you see?

KING.  I see that the darkness of the infinite heavens, whirled
into life and being by the power of my love, has drawn the light
of a myriad stars into itself, and incarnated itself in a form of
flesh and blood.  And in that form, what aeons of thought and
striving, untold yearnings of limitless skies, the countless
gifts of unnumbered seasons!

SUDARSHANA.  Am I so wonderful, so beautiful?  When I hear you
speak so, my heart swells with gladness and pride.  But how can I
believe the wonderful things you tell me?  I cannot find them in
myself!

KING.  Your own mirror will not reflect them--it lessens you,
limits you, makes you look small and insignificant.  But could
you see yourself mirrored in my own mind, how grand would you
appear!  In my own heart you are no longer the daily individual
which you think you are--you are verily my second self.

SUDARSHANA.  Oh, do show me for an instant how to see with your
eyes!  Is there nothing at all like darkness to you?  I am afraid
when I think of this.  This darkness which is to me real and
strong as death--is this simply nothing to you?  Then how can
there be any union at all between us, in a place like this?  No,
no--it is impossible: there is a barrier betwixt us two: not here,
no, not in this place.  I want to find you and see you where I
see trees and animals, birds and stones and the earth

KING.  Very well, you can try to find me--but none will point me
out to you.  You will have to recognise me, if you can, yourself.
And even if anybody professes to show me to you, how can you be
sure he is speaking the truth?

SUDARSHANA.  I shall know you; I shall recognise you.  I shall
find you out among a million men.  I cannot be mistaken.

KING.  Very well, then, to-night, during the festival of the full
moon of the spring, you will try to find me out from the high
turret of my palace--search for me with your own eyes amongst the
crowd of people.

SUDARSHANA.  Wilt thou be there among them?

KING.  I shall show myself again and again, from every side of
the crowd.  Surangama!

[Enter SURANGAMA]

SURANGAMA.  What is thy pleasure, lord?

KING.  To-night is the full moon festival of the spring.

SURANGAMA.  What have I to do to-night?

KING.  To-day is a festive day, not a day of work.  The pleasure
gardens are in their full bloom--you will join in my festivities
there.

SURANGAMA.  I shall do as thou desirest, lord.

KING.  The Queen wants to see me to-night with her own eyes.

SURANGAMA.  Where will the Queen see you?

KING.  Where the music will play at its sweetest, where the air
will be heavy with the dust of flowers--there in the pleasure
grove of silver light and mellow gloom.

SURANGAMA.  What can be seen in the hide-and-seek of darkness and
light?  There the wind is wild and restless, everything is dance
and swift movement--will it not puzzle the eyes?

KING.  The Queen is curious to search me out.

SURANGAMA.  Curiosity will have to come back baffled and in
tears!

SONG.

/*
  Ah, they would fly away, the restless vagrant eyes, the wild
    birds of the forest!
  But the time of their surrender will come, their flights hither
    and thither will be ended when
  The music of enchantment will pursue them and pierce their
    hearts.
    Alas, the wild birds would fly to the wilderness!
*/




III


[Before the Pleasure Gardens.  Enter AVANTI, KOSHALA, KANCHI, and
other KINGS]

AVANTI.  Will the King of this place not receive us?

KANCHI.  What manner of governing a country is this?  The King is
having a festival in a forest, where even the meanest and
commonest people can have easy access!

KOSHALA.  We ought to have had a separate place set apart and
ready for our reception.

KANCHI.  If he has not prepared such a place yet, we shall compel
him to have one erected for us.

KOSHALA.  All this makes one naturally suspect if these people
have really got any King at all--it looks as if an unfounded
rumour has led us astray.

AVANTI.  It may be so with regard to the King, but the Queen
Sudarshana of this place isn't at all an unfounded rumour.

KOSHALA.  It is only for her sake that I have cared to come at
all.  I don't mind omitting to see one who never makes himself
visible, but it would be a stupid mistake if we were to go away
without a sight of one who is eminently worth a visit.

KANCHI.  Let us make some definite plan, then.

AVANTI.  A plan is an excellent thing, so long as you are not
yourself entangled in it.

KANCHI.  Hang it, who are these vermin swarming this way?  Here!
who are you?

[Enter GRANDFATHER and the boys]

GRANDFATHER.  We are the Jolly Band of Have-Nothings.

AVANTI.  The introduction was superfluous.  But you will take
yourselves away a little further and leave us in peace.

GRANDFATHER.  We never suffer from a want of space: we can afford
to give you as wide a berth as you like.  What little suffices
for us is never the bone of contention between any rival
claimants.  Is not that so, my little friends?  [They sing.]

SONG.

/*
  We have nothing, indeed we have nothing at all!
    We sing merrily fol de rol de rol!
  Some build high walls of their houses
    On the bog of the sands of gold.
  We stand before them and sing
      Fol de rol de rol.
  Pickpockets hover about us
    And honour us with covetous glances.
  We shake our empty pockets and sing
      Fol de rol de rol.
  When death, the old hag, steals to our doors
    We snap our fingers at her face,
  And we sing in a chorus with gay flourishes
      Fol de rol de rol.
*/

KANCHI.  Look over there, Koshala, who are those coming this way?
A pantomime?  Somebody is out masquerading as a King.

KOSHALA.  The King of this place may tolerate all this
tomfoolery, but we won't.

AVANTI.  He is perhaps some rural chief.

[Enter GUARDS on foot]

KANCHI.  What country does your King come from?

FIRST SOLDIER.  He is the King of this country.  He is going to
command the festivities.  [They go out.]

KOSHALA.  What!  The King of this country come out for the
festivities!

AVANTI.  Indeed!  We shall then have to return with a sight of
him only--leaving the delectable Queen unseen.

KANCHI.  Do you really think that fellow spoke the truth?
Anybody can pass himself off as the King of this kingless
country.  Can you not see that the man looks like a dressed-up
King--much too over-dressed?

AVANTI.  But he looks handsome--his appearance is not without a
certain pleasing attractiveness.

KANCHI.  He may be pleasing to your eye, but if you look at him
closely enough there can be no mistaking him .  You will see how
I expose him before you all.

[Enter the trumped-up "KING".]

"KING".  Welcome, princes, to our kingdom!  I trust your
reception has been properly looked after by my officials?

KINGS.  [with feigned courtesy] Oh yes--nothing was lacking in
the reception.

KANCHI.  If there was any shortcoming at all, it has been made up
by the honour of our sight of your Majesty.

"KING".  We do not show ourselves to the general public, but your
great devotion and loyalty to us has made it a pleasure for us
not to deny ourselves to you.

KANCHI.  It is truly hard for us, your Majesty, to bear the
weight of your gracious favours.

"KING".  We are afraid we shall not be able to stop here long.

KANCHI.  I have thought so, already: you do not quite look up to
it.

"KING".  In the meantime if you have any favours to ask of us

KANCHI.  We have: but we would like to speak a little more in
private.

"KING".  [to his attendants] Retire a little from our presence.
[They retire.] Now you can express your desires without any
reserve.

KANCHI.  There will be no reserve on our part--our only fear is
that you might think restraint necessary for yourself.

"KING".  Oh no, you need have no scruples on that score.

KANCHI.  Come, then, do us homage by placing your head on the
ground before us.

"KING".  It seems my servants have distributed the Varuni spirits
too liberally in the reception camps.

KANCHI.  False pretender, it is you who are suffering from an
overdose of arrogant spirits.  Your head will soon kiss the dust.

"KING".  Princes, these heavy jokes are not worthy of a king.

KANCHI.  Those who will jest properly with you are near at hand.
General!

"KING".  No more, I entreat you.  I can see plainly I owe homage to
you all.  The head is bowing down of itself--there is no need for
the application of any sharp methods to lay it low.  So here I do
my obeisance to you all.  If you kindly allow me to escape I
shall not inflict my presence long on you.

KANCHI.  Why should you escape?  We will make you king of this
place--let us carry our joke to its legitimate finish.  Have you
got any following?

"KING".  I have.  Every one who sees me in the streets flocks after
me.  When I had a meagre retinue at first every one regarded me
with suspicion, but now with the increasing crowd their doubts
are waning and dissolving.  The crowd is being hypnotised by its
own magnitude.  I have not got to do anything now.

KANCHI.  That's excellent!  From this moment we all promise to
help and stand by you.  But you will have to do us one service in
return.

"KING".  Your commands and the crown you are putting on my head
will be equally binding and sacred to me.

KANCHI.  At present we want nothing more than a sight of the
Queen Sudarshana.  You will have to see to this.

"KING".  I shall spare no pains for that.

KANCHI.  We cannot put much faith on your pains--you will be
solely directed by our instructions.  But now you can go and join
the festivities in the royal arbour with all possible splendour
and magnificence.[They go out.]

[Enter GRANDFATHER and a band of people]

FIRST CITIZEN.  Grandfather, I cannot help saying--yes, and
repeating it five hundred times--that our King is a perfect
fraud.

GRANDFATHER.  Why only five hundred times?  There is no need to
practise such heroic self-control--you can say it five thousand
times if that adds to your pleasure.

SECOND CITIZEN.  But you cannot keep up a dead lie forever.

GRANDFATHER.  It has made me alive, my friend.

THIRD CITIZEN.  We shall proclaim to the whole world that our
King is a lie, the merest and emptiest shadow!

FIRST CITIZEN.  We shall all shout from our housetops that we
have no King--let him do whatever he likes if he exists.

GRANDFATHER.  He will do nothing at all.

SECOND CITIZEN.  My son died untimely at twenty-five of raging
fever in seven days.  Could such a calamity befall me under the
rule of a virtuous King?

GRANDFATHER.  But you still have got two sons left: while I have
lost all my five children one after another.

THIRD CITIZEN.  What do you say now?

GRANDFATHER.  What then?  Shall I lose my King too because I have
lost my children?  Don't take me for such a big fool as that.

FIRST CITIZEN.  It is a fine thing to argue whether there is a
King or not when one is simply starving for want of food!  Will
the King save us?

GRANDFATHER.  Brother, you are right.  But why not <i>find</i>
the King who owns all the food?  You certainly will not find by
your wailings at home.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Look at the justice of our King!  That
Bhadrasen--you know what a touching sight he is when he is
speaking of his King--the sentimental idiot!  He is reduced to
such a state of penury that even the bats that infest his house
find it a too uncomfortable place.

GRANDFATHER.  Why, look at me!  I am toiling and slaving night
and day for my King, but I have not yet received so much as a
brass farthing for my pains.

THIRD CITIZEN.  Now, what do you think of that?

GRANDFATHER.  What should I think?  Does any one reward his
friends?  Go, my friends, and say if you like that our King
exists nowhere.  That is also a part of our ceremony in
celebrating this festival.




IV


[Turret of the Royal Palace.  SUDARSHANA and her friend ROHINI]

SUDARSHANA.  You may make mistakes, Rohini, but I cannot be
mistaken: am I not the Queen?  That, of course, must be my King.

ROHINI.  He who has conferred such high honour upon you cannot be
long in showing himself to you.

SUDARSHANA.  His very form makes me restless like a caged bird.
Did you try well to ascertain who he is?

ROHINI.  Yes, I did.  Every one I asked said that he was the
King.

SUDARSHANA.  What country is he the King of?

ROHINI.  Our country, King of this land.

SUDARSHANA.  Are you sure that you are speaking of him who has a
sunshade made of flowers held over his head?

ROHINI.  The same: he whose flag has the <i>Kimshuk</i> flower
painted on it.

SUDARSHANA.  I recognised him at once, of course, but it is you
who had your doubts.

ROHINI.  We are apt to make mistakes, my Queen, and we are afraid
to offend you in case we are wrong.

SUDARSHANA.  Would that Surangama were here!  There would remain
no room for doubt then.

ROHINI.  Do you think her cleverer than any of us?

SUDARSHANA.  Oh no, but she would recognise him instantly.

ROHINI.  I cannot believe that she would.  She merely pretends to
know him.  There is none to test her knowledge if she professes
to know the King.  If we were as shameless as she is, it would
not have been difficult for us to boast about our acquaintance
with the King.

SUDARSHANA.  But no, she never boasts.

ROHINI.  It is pure affectation, the whole of it: which often
goes a longer way than open boasting.  She is up to all manner of
tricks: that is why we could never like her.

SUDARSHANA.  But whatever you may say, I should have liked to ask
her if she were here.

ROHINI.  Very well, Queen.  I shall bring her here.  She must be
lucky if she is indispensable for the Queen to know the King.

SUDARSHANA.  Oh no--it isn't for that--but I would like to hear
it said by every one.

ROHINI.  Is not every one saying it?  Why, just listen, the
acclamations of the people mount up even to this height!

SUDARSHANA.  Then do one thing: put these flowers on a lotus
leaf, and take them to him.

ROHINI.  And what am I to say if he asks who sends them?

SUDARSHANA.  You will not have to say anything--he will know.  He
thought that I would not be able to recognise him: I cannot let
him off without showing that I have found him out.
[ROHINI goes out with the flowers.]

SUDARSHANA.  My heart is all a-quiver and restless to-night: I
have never felt like this before.  The white, silver light of the
full moon is flooding the heavens and brimming over on every side
like the bubbling foam of wine, ...  It seizes on me like a
yearning, like a mantling intoxication.  Here, who is here?

[Enter a SERVANT]

SERVANT.  What is your pleasure, your Majesty?

SUDARSHANA.  Do you see those festive boys singing and moving
through the alleys and avenues of the mango trees?  Call them
hither, bring them to me: I want to hear them sing.  [SERVANT
goes out and enters with the boys.]  Come, living emblems of
youthful spring, begin your festive song!  All my mind and body
is song and music to-night--but the ineffable melody escapes my
tongue: do you then sing for my sake!

SONG.

/*
  My sorrow is sweet to me in this spring night.
  My pain smites at the chords of my love and softly sings.
  Visions take birth from my yearning eyes and flit in the
    moonlit sky.
  The smells from the depths of the woodlands have lost their way
    in my dreams.
  Words come in whispers to my ears, I know not from where,
  And bells in my anklets tremble and jingle in time with my
    heart thrills.
*/

SUDARSHANA.  Enough, enough--I cannot bear it any more!  Your
song has filled my eyes with tears....  A fancy comes to me--that
desire can never attain its object--it need never attain it.
What sweet hermit of the woods has taught you this song?  Oh that
my eyes could see him whose song my ears have heard!  Oh, how I
wish--I wish I could wander rapt and lovely in the thick woodland
arbours of the heart!  Dear boys of the hermitage! how shall I
reward you?  This necklace is but made of jewels, hard stones--
its hardness will give you pain--I have got nothing like the
garlands of flowers you have on.  [The boys bow and go out.]

[Enter ROHINI]

SUDARSHANA.  I have not done well--I have not done well, Rohini.
I feel ashamed to ask you what happened.  I have just realised
that no hand can really give the greatest of gifts.  Still, let
me hear all.

ROHINI.  When I gave the King those flowers, he did not appear to
understand anything.

SUDARSHANA.  You don't say so?  He did not understand

ROHINI.  No; he sat there like a doll, without uttering a single
word.  I think he did not want to show that he understood
nothing, so he just held his tongue.

SUDARSHANA.  Fie on me!  My shamelessness has been justly
punished.  Why did you not bring back my flowers?

ROHINI.  How could I?  The King of Kanchi, a very clever man, who
was sitting by him, took in everything at a glance, and he just
smiled a bit and said, "Emperor, the Queen Sudarshana sends your
Majesty her greetings with these blossoms--the blossoms that
belong to the God of Love, the friend of Spring."  The King
seemed to awake with a start, and said, "This is the crown of all
my regal glory to-night."  I was coming back, all out of
countenance, when the King of Kanchi took off this necklace of
jewels from the King's person, and said to me, "Friend, the
King's garland gives itself up to you, in return for the happy
fortune you have brought."

SUDARSHANA.  What, Kanchi had to make the King understand all
this!  Woe is me, to-night's festival has opened wide for me the
doors of ignominy and shame!  What else could I expect?  Leave me
alone, Rohini; I want solitude for a time.  [ROHINI goes out.]  A
great blow has shattered my pride to atoms to-day, and yet ...  I
cannot efface from my mind that beautiful, fascinating figure!
No pride is left me--I am beaten, vanquished, utterly helpless....
I cannot even turn away from him.  Oh, how the wish comes back to
me again and again--to ask that garland of Rohini!  But what
would she think!  Rohini!

[Enter ROHINI]

ROHINI.  What is your wish?

SUDARSHANA.  What reward do you deserve for your services to-day?

ROHINI.  Nothing from you--but I had my reward from the King as
it should be.

SUDARSHANA.  That is no free gift, but an extortion, of reward.
I do not like to see you put on what was given in so indifferent
a manner.  Take it off--I give you my bracelets if you leave it
here.  Take these bracelets, and go now.  [ROHINI goes out.]
Another defeat!  I should have thrown this necklace away,--but I
could not!  It is pricking me as if it were a garland of thorns--
but I cannot throw it away.  This is what the god of the festival
has brought me to-night--this necklace of ignominy and shame!




V


[GRANDFATHER near the door of the Pleasure House.  A Company of
MEN]

GRANDFATHER.  Have you had enough of it, friends?

FIRST MAN.  Oh, more than that, Grandpa.  Just see, they have
made me red all over.  None has escaped.

[Author's note: During the spring festival in India people throw
red powder on each other.  In this play this red powder has been
taken to be the symbol of the passion of love.]

GRANDFATHER.  No?  Did they throw the red dust on the Kings too?

SECOND MAN.  But who could approach them?  They were all secure
inside the enclosures.

GRANDFATHER.  So they have escaped you!  Could you not throw the
least bit of colour on them?  You should have forced your way
there.

THIRD MAN.  My dear old man, they have a different sort of red
specially to themselves.  Their eyes are red: the turbans of
their guards and retinue are red too.  And the latter flourished
their swords about so much that a little more nearness on our
part would have meant a lavish display of the fundamental red
colour.

GRANDFATHER.  Well done, friends--always keep them at a distance.
They are the exiles of the Earth--and we have got to keep them
so.

THIRD MAN.  I am going home, Grandpa; it is past midnight.[Goes
out.]

[Enter a BAND of SINGERS, singing.]

/*
  All blacks and whites have lost their distinction
  And have become red--red as the tinge of your feet.
  Red is my bodice and red are my dreams,
  My heart sways and trembles like a red lotus.
*/

GRANDFATHER.  Excellent, my friends, splendid!  So you had a
really enjoyable time!

SINGERS.  Oh, grand!  Everything was red, red!  Only the moon in
the sky gave us the slip--it remained white.

GRANDFATHER.  He only looks so innocent from the outside.  If you
had only taken off his white disguise, you would have seen his
trickery.  I have been watching what red colours he is throwing
on the Earth to-night.  And yet, fancy his remaining white and
colourless all the while!

SONG.

/*
  With you is my game, love, my love!
  My heart is mad, it will never own defeat,
  Do you think you will escape stainless yourself reddening me
    with red powder?
  Could I not colour your robe with the red pollens of the
    blossom of my heart?
*/

[They go out.]

[Enter the "KING" and KANCHI.]

KANCHI.  You must do exactly as I have told you.  Let there be no
mistake of any kind.

"KING".  There shall be no mistake.

KANCHI.  The Queen Sudarshana's mansions are in the ...

"KING".  Yes, sire, I have seen the place well.

KANCHI.  What you have got to do is to set fire to the garden,
and then you will take advantage of the bustle and confusion to
accomplish your object straightway.

"KING".  I shall remember.

KANCHI.  Look here, Sir Pretender, I cannot help thinking that a
needless fear is troubling us--there is really no King in this
country.

"KING".  My sole aim is to rid this country of this anarchy.  Your
common man cannot live without a King, whether a real one or a
fraud!  Anarchy is always a source of danger.

KANCHI.  Pious benefactor of the people, your wonderful self-
sacrifice should really be an example to all of us.  I am
thinking of doing this extraordinary service to the people
myself.  [They go out.]




VI


ROHINI.  What is the matter?  I cannot make out what is all this!
[To the GARDENERS.] Where are you all going away in such a hurry?

FIRST GARDENER.  We are going out of the garden.

ROHINI.  Where?

SECOND GARDENER.  We do not know where--the King has called us.

ROHINI.  Why, the King is in the garden.  Which King has called
you?

FIRST GARDENER.  We cannot say.

SECOND GARDENER.  The King we have been serving all our life, of
course.

ROHINI.  Will you all go?

FIRST GARDENER.  Yes, all--we have to go instantly.  Otherwise we
might get into trouble.  [They go out.]

ROHINI.  I cannot understand their words....  I am afraid.  They
are scampering off like wild animals that fly just before the
bank of a river breaks down into the water.

[Enter KING OF KOSHALA]

KOSHALA.  Rohini, do you know where your King and Kanchi have
gone?

ROHINI.  They are somewhere in the garden, but I could not tell
you where.

KOSHALA.  I cannot really understand their intentions.  I have
not done well to put my trust in Kanchi.  [Exit.]

ROHINI.  What is this dark affair going on amongst these kings?
Something dreadful is going to happen soon.  Shall I too be drawn
into this affair?  [Enter AVANTI]

AVANTI.  Rohini, do you know where the other princes are?

ROHINI.  It is difficult to say which of them is where.  The King
of Koshala just passed by in this direction.

AVANTI.  I am not thinking of Koshala.  Where are your King and
Kanchi?

ROHINI.  I have not seen them for a long time.

AVANTI.  Kanchi is always avoiding us.  He is certainly planning
to deceive us all.  I have not done well to put my hand in this
imbroglio.  Friend, could you kindly tell me any way out of this
garden?

ROHINI.  I have none.

AVANTI.  Is there no man here who will show me the way out?

ROHINI.  The servants have all left the garden.

AVANTI.  Why did they do so?

ROHINI.  I could not exactly understand what they meant.  They
said the King had commanded them to leave the garden at once.

AVANTI.  King?  Which King?  Rohini They could not say exactly.

AVANTI.  This does not sound well.  I shall have to find a way
out at any cost.  I cannot stay here a single moment more.  [Goes
out hurriedly.]

ROHINI.  Where shall I find the King?  When I gave him the
flowers the Queen had sent, he did not seem much interested in me
at the time; but ever since that hour he has been showering gifts
and presents on me.  This causeless generosity makes me more
afraid....  Where are the birds flying at such an hour of the
night?  What has frightened them all of a sudden?  This is not
the usual time of their flight, certainly, ...  Why is the
Queen's pet deer running that way?  Chapata!  Chapata!  She does
not even hear my call.  I have never seen a night like this!  The
horizon on every side suddenly becomes red, like a madman's eye!
The sun seems to be setting at this untimely hour on all sides at
the same time.  What madness of the Almighty is this!  ...  Oh, I
am frightened!  ...  Where shall I find the King?




VII


[At the Door of the QUEEN'S Palace]

"KING".  What is this you have done, Kanchi?

KANCHI.  I wanted to fire only this part of the garden near the
palace.  I had no idea that it would spread so quickly on all
sides.  Tell me, quick, the way out of this garden.

"KING".  I can tell you nothing about it.  Those who brought us
here have all fled away.




VII


KANCHI.  You are a native of this country--you must know the way.

"KING".  I have never entered these inner royal gardens before.

KANCHI.  I won't hear of it--you must show me the way, or I shall
split you into halves.

"KING".  You may take my life by that means, but it would be a very
precarious method of finding the way out of this garden.

KANCHI.  Why were you, then, going about saying that you were the
King of this country?

"KING".  I am not the King--I am not the King.  [Throwing himself
on the ground with folded hands.]  Where art thou, my King?  Save
me, oh, save me!  I am a rebel--punish me, but do not kill me!

KANCHI.  What is the use of shouting and cringing to the empty
air?  It is a much better way of spending the time to search for
the way.

"KING".  I shall lie down here--I shall not move an inch.  Come
what will, I shall not complain.

KANCHI.  I will not allow all this nonsense.  If I am to be burnt
to death, you will be my companion to the very end.

FROM THE OUTSIDE.  Oh, save us, save us, our King!  The fire is
on all sides of us!

KANCHI.  Fool, get up, lose no more time.

SUDARSHANA.  [entering] King, O my King!  save me, save me from
death!  I am surrounded by fire.

"KING".  Who is the King?  I am no King.

SUDARSHANA.  You are not the King?

"KING".  No, I am a hypocrite, I am a scoundrel.  [Flinging his
crown on the ground.]  Let my deception and hypocrisy be shattered
into dust!  [Goes out with KANCHI.]

SUDARSHANA.  No King!  He is not the King?  Then, O thou God of
fire, burn me, reduce me to ashes!  I shall throw myself into thy
hands, O thou great purifier; burn to ashes my shame, my longing,
my desire.

ROHINI.  [entering] Queen, where are you going?  All your inner
chambers are shrouded in raging fire--do you not enter there.

SUDARSHANA.  Yes!  I will enter those burning chambers!  It is
the fire of my death!  [Enters the Palace.]




VIII


[The Dark Room.  The KING and SUDARSRANA]

KING.  Do not be afraid--you have no cause for fear.  The fire
will not reach this room.

SUDARSHANA.  I have no fear--but oh, shame has accompanied me
like a raging fire.  My face, my eyes, my heart, every part of my
body is being scorched and burnt by its flames.

KING.  It will be some time before you get over this burning.

SUDARSHANA.  This fire will never cease-will never cease!

KING.  Do not be despondent, Queen!

SUDARSHANA.  O King, I shall not hide anything from you....  I
have another's garland round my neck.

KING.  That garland, too, is mine--how else could he get it?  He
stole it from my room.

SUDARSHANA.  But it is <i>his</i> gift to me: yet I could not
fling this garland away!  When the fire came roaring on all
sides of me, I thought of throwing this garland into the fire.
But no, I could not.  My mind whispered, "Let that garland be
on you in your death." ...  What fire is this, O King, into
which I, who had come out to see you, leaped like a moth that
cannot resist the flame?  What a pain is this, oh, what agony!
The fire keeps burning as fiercely as ever, but I go on
living within its flames!

KING.  But you have seen me at last--your desire has been
fulfilled.

SUDARSHANA.  But did I seek to see you in the midst of this
fearful doom?  I know not what I saw, but my heart is still
beating fast with fear.

KING.  What did you see?

SUDARSHANA.  Terrible,--oh, it was terrible!  I am afraid even to
think of it again.  Black, black--oh, thou art black like the
everlasting night!  I only looked on thee for one dreadful
instant.  The blaze of the fire fell on your features--you looked
like the awful night when a comet swings fearfully into our ken--
oh, then I closed my eyes--I could not look on you any more.
Black as the threatening storm-cloud, black as the shoreless sea
with the spectral red tint of twilight on its tumultuous waves!

KING.  Have I not told you before that one cannot bear my sight
unless one is already prepared for me?  One would want to run
away from me to the ends of the earth.  Have I not seen this
times without number?  That is why I wanted to reveal myself to
you slowly and gradually, not all too sudden.

SUDARSHANA.  But sin came and destroyed all your hopes--the very
possibility of a union with you has now become unthinkable to me.

KING.  It will be possible in time, my Queen.  The utter and
bleak blackness that has to-day shaken you to your soul with fear
will one day be your solace and salvation.  What else can my love
exist for?

SUDARSHANA.  It cannot be, it is not possible.  What will your
love only do?  <i>My</i> love has now turned away from you.
Beauty has cast its spell on me--this frenzy, this intoxication
will never leave me--it has dazzled and fired my eyes, it has
thrown its golden glamour over my very dreams!  I have told you
all now--punish me as you like.

KING.  The punishment has already begun.

SUDARSHANA.  But if you do not cast me off.  I will leave you

KING.  You have the utmost liberty to do as you like.

SUDARSHANA.  I cannot bear your presence!  My heart is angry at
you.  Why did you--but what have you done to me? ...  Why are
you like this?  Why did they tell me you were fair and handsome?
Thou art black, black as night--I shall never, I can never, like
you.  I have seen what I love--it is soft as cream, delicate as
the <i>shirisha</i> flower, beautiful as a butterfly.

KING.  It is false as a mirage, empty as a bubble.

SUDARSHANA.  Let it be--but I cannot stand near you--I simply
cannot!  I must fly away from here.  Union with you, it cannot be
possible!  It cannot be anything but a false union--my mind must
inevitably turn away from you.

KING.  Will you not even try a little?

SUDARSHANA.  I have been trying since yesterday--but the more I
try, the more rebellious does my heart become.  If I stay with
you I shall constantly be pursued and hounded by the thought that
I am impure, that I am false and faithless.

KING.  Well then, you can go as far from me as you like.

SUDARSHANA.  I cannot fly away from you--just because you do not
prevent my going.  Why do you not hold me back, hold me by the
hair, saying, "You shall not go"?  Why do you not strike me?  Oh,
punish me, strike me, beat me with violent hands!  But your
unresisting silence makes me wild--oh, I cannot bear it!

KING.  How do you think that I am really silent?  How do you know
that I am not trying to keep you back?

SUDARSHANA.  Oh, no, no !--I cannot bear this--tell me aloud,
command me with the voice of thunder, compel me with words that
will drown everything else in my ears--do not let me off so
easily, so mildly!

KING.  I shall leave you free, but why should I let you break
away from me?

SUDARSHANA.  You will not let me?  Well then, I must go!

KING.  Go then!

SUDARSHANA.  Then I am not to blame at all.  You could have held
me back by force, but you did not!  You have not hindered me--and
now I shall go away.  Command your sentinels to prevent my going.

KING.  No one will stand in your way.  You can go as free as the
broken storm-cloud driven by the tempest.

SUDARSHANA.  I can resist no more--something in me is impelling
me forward--I am breaking away from my anchor!  Perhaps I shall
sink, but I shall return no more.  [She rushes out.]

[Enter SURANGAMA, who sings]

SURANGAMA.  What will of thine is this that sends me afar!  Again
shall I come back at thy feet from all my wanderings.  It is thy
love that feigns this neglect--thy caressing hands are pushing me
away--to draw me back to thy arms again!  O my King, what is this
game that thou art playing throughout thy kingdom?

SUDARSHANA.  [re-entering] King, O King!

SURANGAMA.  He has gone away.

SUDARSHANA.  Gone away?  Well then, ...  then he has cast me off
for good!  I have come back, but he could not wait a single
instant for me!  Very well, then, I am now perfectly free.
Surangama, did he ask you to keep me back?

SURANGAMA.  No, he said nothing.

SUDARSHANA.  Why should he say anything?  Why should he care for
me? ...  I am then free, perfectly free.  But, Surangama, I
wanted to ask one thing of the King, but could not utter it in
his presence.  Tell me if he has punished the prisoners with
death.

SURANGAMA.  Death?  My King never punishes with death.

SUDARSHANA.  What has he done to them, then?

SURANGAMA.  He has set them at liberty.  Kanchi has acknowledged
his defeat and gone back to his kingdom.

SUDARSHANA.  Ah, what a relief!

SURANGAMA.  My Queen, I have one prayer to make to you.

SUDARSHANA.  You will not have to utter your prayer in words,
Surangama.  Whatever jewellery and ornaments the King gave me, I
leave to you--I am not worthy to wear them now.

SURANGAMA.  No, I do not want them, my Queen.  My master has
never given me any ornaments to wear--my unadorned plainness is
good enough for me.  He has not given me anything of which I can
boast before people.

SUDARSHANA.  What do you want of me then?

SURANGAMA.  I too shall go with you, my Queen.

SUDARSHANA.  Consider what you are saying; you are wanting to
leave your master.  What a prayer for you to make!

SURANGAMA.  I shall not go far from him--when you are going out
unguarded he will be with you, close by your side.

SUDARSHANA.  You are talking nonsense, my child.  I wanted to
take Rohini with me, but she would not come.  What gives you
courage enough to wish to come with me?

SURANGAMA.  I have got neither courage nor strength.  But I shall
go--courage will come of itself, and strength too will come.

SUDARSHANA.  No, I cannot take you with me; your presence will
constantly remind me of my shame; I shall not be able to endure
that.

SURANGAMA.  O my Queen, I have made all your good and all your
evil my own as well; will you treat me as a stranger still?  I
must go with you.




IX


[The KING OF KANYA KUBJA, father of SUDARSHANA, and his MINISTER]

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  I heard everything before her arrival.

MINISTER.  The princess is waiting alone outside the city gates
on the bank of the river.  Shall I send people to welcome her
home?

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  What!  She who has faithlessly left her
husband--do you propose trumpeting her infamy and shame to every
one by getting up a show for her?

MINISTER.  Shall I then make arrangements for her residence at
the palace?

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  You will do nothing of the sort.  She has
left her place as the Empress of her own accord--here she will
have to work as a maid-servant if she wants to stay in my house.

MINISTER.  It will be hard and bitter to her, Your Highness.

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  If I seek to save her from her sufferings,
then I am not worthy to be her father.

MINISTER.  I shall arrange everything as you wish, Your Highness.

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  Let it be kept a secret that she is my
daughter; otherwise we shall all be in an awful trouble.

MINISTER.  Why do you fear such disaster, Your Highness?

KING OF KANYA KUBJA.  When woman swerves from the right path,
then she appears fraught with the direst calamity.  You do not
know with what deadly fear this daughter of mine has inspired
me--she is coming to my home laden with peril and danger.




X


[Inner Apartments of the Palace.  SUDARSHANA and SURANGAMA]

SUDARSHANA.  Go away from me, Surangama!  A deadly anger rages
within me--I cannot bear anybody--it makes me wild to see you so
patient and submissive.

SURANGAMA.  Whom are you angry with?

SUDARSHANA.  I do not know; but I wish to see everything
destroyed and convulsed in ruin and disaster!  I left my place on
the throne as the Empress in a moment's time.  Did I lose my all
to sweep the dust, to sweat and slave in this dismal hole?  Why
do the torches of mourning not flare up for me all over the
world?  Why does not the earth quake and tremble?  Is my fall but
the unobserved dropping of the puny bean-flower?  Is it not more
like the fall of a glowing star, whose fiery blazon bursts the
heavens asunder?

SURANGAMA.  A mighty forest only smokes and smoulders before it
bursts into a conflagration: the time has not come yet.

SUDARSHANA.  I have thrown my queen's honour and glory to the
dust and winds--but is there no human being who will come out to
meet my desolate soul here?  Alone--oh, I am fearfully, terribly
alone!

SURANGAMA.  You are not alone.

SUDARSHANA.  Surangama, I shall not keep anything from you.  When
he set the palace on fire, I could not be angry with him.  A
great inward joy set my heart a-flutter all the while.  What a
stupendous crime!  What glorious prowess!  It was this courage
that made me strong and fired my own spirits.  It was this
terrible joy that enabled me to leave everything behind me in a
moment's time.  But is it all my imagination only?  Why is there
no sign of his coming anywhere?

SURANGAMA.  He of whom you are thinking did not set fire to the
palace--it is the King of Kanchi who did it.

SUDARSHANA.  Coward!  But is it possible?  So handsome, so
bewitching, and yet no manhood in him!  Have I deceived myself
for the sake of such a worthless creature?  O shame!  Fie on me!
...  But, Surangama, don't you think that your King should yet
have come to take me back?  [SURANGAMA remains silent.]  You think
I am anxious to go back?  Never!  Even if the King really came I
should not have returned.  Not even once did he forbid me to come
away, and I found all the doors wide open to let me out!  And the
stony and dusty road over which I walked--it was nothing to it
that a queen was treading on it.  It is hard and has no feelings,
like your King; the meanest beggar is the same to it as the
highest Empress.  You are silent!  Well, I tell you, your King's
behaviour is--mean, brutal, shameful!

SURANGAMA.  Every one knows that my King is hard and pitiless--no
one has ever been able to move him.

SUDARSHANA.  Why do you, then, call him day and night?

SURANGAMA.  May he ever remain hard and relentless like rock--may
my tears and prayers never move him!  Let my sorrows be ever mine
only--and may his glory and victory be for ever!

SUDARSHANA.  Surangama, look!  A cloud of dust seems to rise over
the eastern horizon across the fields.

SURANGAMA.  Yes, I see it.

SUDARSHANA.  Is that not like the banner of a chariot?

SURANGAMA.  Indeed, a banner it is.

SUDARSHANA.  Then he is coming.  He has come at last!

SURANGAMA.  Who is coming?

SUDARSHANA.  Our King--who else?  How could he live without me?
It is a wonder how he could hold out even for these days.

SURANGAMA.  No, no, this cannot be the King.

SUDARSHANA.  "No," indeed!  As if you know everything!  Your King
is hard, stony, pitiless, isn't he?  Let us see how hard he can
be.  I knew from the beginning that he would come--that he would
have to rush after me.  But remember, Surangama, I never for a
single moment asked him to come.  You will see how I make your
King confess his defeat to me!  Just go out, Surangama, and let
me know everything.  [SURANGAMA goes out.]  But shall I go if he
comes and asks me to return with him?  Certainly not!  I will not
go!  Never!

[Enter SURANGAMA]

SURANGAMA.  It is not the King, my Queen.

SUDARSHANA.  Not the King?  Are you quite sure?  What!  he has
not come yet?

SURANGAMA.  No, my King never raises so much dust when he comes.
Nobody can know when he comes at all.

SUDARSHANA.  Then this is--

SURANGAMA.  The same: he is coming with the King of Kanchi.

SUDARSHANA.  Do you know his name?

SURANGAMA.  His name is Suvarna.

SUDARSHANA.  It is he, then.  I thought, "I am lying here like
waste refuse and offal, which no one cares even to touch."  But
my hero is coming now to release me.  Did you know Suvarna?

SURANGAMA.  When I was at my father's home, in the gambling den

SUDARSHANA.  No, no, I won't hear anything of him from you.  He
is my own hero, my only salvation.  I shall know him without your
telling stories about him.  But just see, a nice man your King
is!  He did not care to come to rescue me from even this
degradation.  You cannot blame me after this.  I could not have
waited for him all my life here, toiling ignominiously like a
bondslave.  I shall never have <i>your</i> meekness and
submissiveness.




XI


[Encampment]

KANCHI.  [To KANYA KUBJA'S MESSENGER.]  Tell your King that he
need not receive us exactly as his guests.  We are on our way
back to our kingdoms, but we are waiting to rescue Queen
Sudarshana from the servitude and degradation to which she is
condemned here.

MESSENGER.  Your Highness, you will remember that the princess is
in her father's house.

KANCHI.  A daughter may stay in her father's home only so long as
she remains unmarried.

MESSENGER.  But her connections with her father's family remain
intact still.

KANCHI.  She has abjured all such relations now.

MESSENGER.  Such relationship can never be abjured, Your
Highness, on this side of death: it may remain in abeyance at
times, but can never be wholly broken up.

KANCHI.  If the King chooses not to give up his daughter to me on
peaceful terms, our <i>Kshatriya</i> code of righteousness will
oblige me to employ force.  You may take this as my last word.

MESSENGER.  Your Highness, do not forget that our King too is
bound by the same code.  It is idle to expect that he will
deliver up his daughter by merely hearing your threats.

KANCHI.  Tell your King that I have come prepared for such an
answer.  [MESSENGER goes out.]

SUVARNA.  King of Kanchi, it seems to me that we are daring too
much.

KANCHI.  What pleasure would there be in this adventure if it
were otherwise?

SUVARNA.  It does not cost much courage to challenge Kanya
Kubja--but ...

KANCHI.  If you once begin to be afraid of "but," you will hardly
find a place in this world safe enough for you.

[Enter a SOLDIER]

SOLDIER.  Your Highness!  I have just received the news that the
Kings of Koshala, Avanti, and Kalinga are coming this way with
their armies.  [Exit.]

KANCHI.  Just what I was afraid of!  The report of Sudarshana's
flight has spread abroad--now we are going to be in for a general
scramble which is sure to end in smoke.

SUVARNA.  It is useless now, Your Highness.  These are not good
tidings.  I am perfectly certain that it is our Emperor himself
who has secretly spread the report everywhere.

KANCHI.  Why, what good will it bring him?

SUVARNA.  The greedy ones will tear one another to pieces in the
general rivalry and scramble--and he will take advantage of the
situation to go back with the booty.

KANCHI.  Now it becomes clear why your King never shows himself.
His trick is to multiply himself on every side--fear makes him
visible everywhere.  But I will still maintain that your King is
but an empty fraud from top to bottom.

SUVARNA.  But, please Your Highness, will you have the kindness
to let me off?

KANCHI.  I cannot let you go--I have some use for you in this
affair.

[Enter a SOLDIER]

SOLDIER.  Your Highness, Virat, Panchal, and Vidarbha too have
come.  They have encamped on the other side of the river.[Exit.]

KANCHI.  In the beginning we must all fight together.  Let the
battle with Kanya Kubja first be over, then we shall find some
way out of the difficulty.

SUVARNA.  Please do not drag me into your plans--I shall be happy
if you leave me alone--I am a poor, mean creature--nothing can--

KANCHI.  Look here, king of hypocrites, ways and means are never
of a very exalted order--roads and stairs and so forth are always
to be trodden under our feet.  The advantage of utilising men
like you in our plans is that we have to make use of no mask or
illusion.  But if I were to consult my prime minister, it would
be absurd for me to call theft by any name less dignified than
public benefit.  I will go now, and move the princes about like
pawns on the chessboard; the game cannot evidently go on if all
the chessmen propose moving like kings!




XII


[Interior of the Palace]

SUDARSHANA.  Is the fight still going on?

SURANGAMA.  As fiercely as ever.

SUDARSHANA.  Before going out to the battle my father came to me
and said, "You have come away from one King, but you have drawn
seven Kings after you: I have a mind to cut you up into seven
pieces and distribute them among the princes.  It would have been
well if he did so.  Surangama!

SURANGAMA.  Yes?

SUDARSHANA.  If your King had the power to save me, could my
present state have left him unmoved?

SURANGAMA.  My Queen, why do you ask me?  Have I the power to
answer for my King?  I know my understanding is dark; that is why
I never dare to judge him.

SUDARSHANA.  Who have joined in this fight?

SURANGAMA.  All the seven princes.

SUDARSHANA.  No one else?

SURANGAMA.  Suvarna attempted to escape--in secret before the
fight began--but Kanchi has kept him a prisoner in his camps.

SUDARSHANA.  Oh, I should have been dead long ago!  But, O King,
my King, if you had come and helped my father, your fame would
have been none the less!  It would have become brighter and
higher.  Are you quite sure, Surangama, that he has not come?

SURANGAMA.  I know nothing for certain.

SUDARSHANA.  But since I came here I have felt suddenly many a
time as if somebody were playing on a <i>vina</i> below my window.

SURANGAMA.  There is nothing impossible in the idea that somebody
indulges his taste for music there.

SUDARSHANA.  There is a deep thicket below my window--I try to
find out who it is every time I hear the music, but I can see
nothing distinctly.

SURANGAMA.  Perhaps some wayfarer rests in the shade and plays on
the instrument.

SUDARSHANA.  It may be so, but my old window in the palace comes
back to my memory.  I used to come after dressing in the evening
and stand at my window, and out of the blank darkness of our
lampless meeting-place used to stream forth strains and songs and
melodies, dancing and vibrating in endless succession and
overflowing profusion, like the passionate exuberance of a
ceaseless fountain!

SURANGAMA.  O deep and sweet darkness!  the profound and mystic
darkness whose servant I was!

SUDARSHANA.  Why did you come away with me from that room?

SURANGAMA.  Because I knew he would follow us and take us back.

SUDARSHANA.  But no, he will not come--he has left us for good.
Why should he not?

SURANGAMA.  If he can leave us like that, then we have no need of
him.  Then he does not exist for us: then that dark chamber is
totally empty and void--no vina ever breathed its music there--
none called you or me in that chamber; then everything has been a
delusion and an idle dream.

[Enter the DOORKEEPER]

SUDARSHANA.  Who are you?

DOORKEEPER.  I am the porter of this palace.

SUDARSHANA.  Tell me quickly what you have got to say.

DOORKEEPER.  Our King has been taken prisoner.

SUDARSHANA.  Prisoner?  O Mother Earth!  [Faints.]




XIII


[KING OF KANCHI and SUVARNA]

SUVARNA.  You say, then, that there will be no more necessity of
any fight amongst yourselves?

KANCHI.  No, you need not be afraid.  I have made all the princes
agree that he whom the Queen accepts as her husband will have
her, and the others will have to abandon all further struggle.

SUVARNA.  But you must have done with me now, Your Highness--so I
beg to be let off now.  Unfit as I am for anything, the fear of
impending danger has unnerved me and stunned my intellect.  You
will therefore find it difficult to put me to any use.

KANCHI.  You will have to sit there as my umbrella-holder.

SUVARNA.  Your servant is ready for anything; but of what profit
will that be to you?

KANCHI.  My man, I see that your weak intellect cannot go with a
high ambition in you.  You have no notion yet with what favour
the Queen looked upon you.  After all, she cannot possibly throw
the bridal garland on an umbrella-bearer's neck in a company of
princes, and yet, I know, she will not be able to turn her mind
away from you.  So on all accounts this garland will fall under
the shade of my regal umbrella.

SUVARNA.  Your Highness, you are entertaining dangerous
imaginings about me.  I pray you, please do not implicate me in
the toils of such groundless notions.  I beg Your Highness most
humbly, pray set me at liberty.

KANCHI.  As soon as my object is attained, I shall not keep you
one moment from your liberty.  Once the end is attained, it is
futile to burden oneself with the means.




XIV


[SUDARSHANA and SURANGAMA at the Window]

SUDARSHANA.  Must I go to the assembly of the princes, then?  Is
there no other means of saving father's life?

SURANGAMA.  The King of Kanchi has said so.

SUDARSHANA .  Are these the words worthy of a King?  Did he say
so with his own lips?

SURANGAMA.  No, his messenger, Suvarna, brought this news.

SUDARSHANA.  Woe, woe is me!

SURANGAMA.  And he produced a few withered flowers and said,
"Tell your Queen that the drier and more withered these souvenirs
of the Spring Festival become, the fresher and more blooming do
they grow within in my heart."

SUDARSHANA.  Stop!  Tell me no more.  Do not torment me any more.

SURANGAMA.  Look!  There sit all the princes in the great
assembly.  He who has no ornament on his person, except a single
garland of flowers round his crown--he is the King of Kanchi.
And he who holds the umbrella over his head, standing behind
him--that is Suvarna.

SUDARSHANA.  Is that Suvarna?  Are you quite certain?

SURANGAMA.  Yes, I know him well.

SUDARSHANA.  Can it be that it is this man that I saw the other
day?  No, no,--I saw something mingled and transfused and blended
with light and darkness, with wind and perfume,--no, no, it
cannot be he; that is not he.

SURANGAMA.  But every one admits that he is exceedingly beautiful
to look at.

SUDARSHANA.  How could that beauty fascinate me?  Oh, what shall
I do to purge my eyes of their pollution?

SURANGAMA.  You will have to wash them in that bottomless
darkness.

SUDARSHANA.  But tell me, Surangama, why does one make such
mistakes?

SURANGAMA.  Mistakes are but the preludes to their own
destruction.

MESSENGER.  [entering] Princess, the Kings are waiting for you in
the hall.  [Exit.]

SUDARSHANA.  Surangama, bring me the veil.  [SURANGAMA goes out.]
O King, my only King!  You have left me alone, and you have been
but just in doing so.  But will you not know the inmost truth
within my soul?  [Taking out a dagger from within her bosom.]
This body of mine has received a stain--I shall make a sacrifice
of it to-day in the dust of the hall, before all these princes!
But shall I never be able to tell you that I know of no stain of
faithlessness within the hidden chambers of my heart?  That dark
chamber where you would come to meet me lies cold and empty
within my bosom to-day--but, O my Lord!  none has opened its
doors, none has entered it but you, O King!  Will you never come
again to open those doors?  Then, let death come, for it is dark
like yourself, and its features are beautiful as yours .  It is
you--it is yourself, O King!




XV


[The Gathering of the PRINCES]

VIDARBHA.  King of Kanchi, how is it that you have not got a
single piece of ornament on your person?

KANCHI.  Because I entertain no hopes at all, my friend.
Ornaments would but double the shame of my defeat.

KALINGA.  But your umbrella-bearer seems to have made up for
that,--he is loaded with gold and jewellery all over.

VIRAT.  The King of Kanchi wants to demonstrate the futility and
inferiority of outer beauty and grandeur.  Vanity of his prowess
has made him discard all outer embellishments from his limbs.

KOSLIALA.  I am quite up to his trickery; he is seeking to prove
his own dignity, maintaining a severe plainness among the
bejewelled princes.

PANCHALA.  I cannot commend his wisdom in this matter.  Every one
knows that a woman's eyes are like a moth in that they fling
themselves headlong on the glare and glitter of jewel and gold.

KALINGA.  But how long shall we have to wait more?

KANCHI.  Do not grow impatient, King of Kalinga--sweet are the
fruits of delay.

KALINGA.  If I were sure of the fruit I could have endured it.
It is because my hopes of tasting the fruit are extremely
precarious that my eagerness to have a sight of her breaks
through all bounds.

KANCHI.  But you are young still--abandoned hope comes back to
you again and again like a shameless woman at your age: we,
however, have long passed that stage.

KOSHALA.  Kanchi, did you feel as if something shook your seat
just now?  Is it an earthquake?

KANCHI.  Earthquake?  I do not know.

VIDARBHA.  Or perhaps some other prince is coming with his army.

KALINGA.  There is nothing against your theory except that we
should have first heard the news from some herald or messenger in
that case.

VIDARBHA.  I cannot regard this as a very auspicious omen.

KANCHI.  Everything looks inauspicious to the eye of fear.

VIDARBHA.  I fear none except Fate, before which courage or
heroism is as futile as it is absurd.

PANCHALA.  Vidarbha, do not darken to-day's happy proceedings
with your unwelcome prognostications.

KANCHI.  I never take the unseen into account till it has become
"seen."

VIDARBHA.  But then it might be too late to do anything.

PANCHALA.  Did we not all of us start at a specially auspicious
moment?

VIDARBHA.  Do you think you insure against every possible risk by
starting at auspicious moments?  It looks as if--

KANCHI.  You had better let the "as if" alone: though our own
creation, it often proves our ruin and destruction.

KALINGA.  Isn't that music somewhere outside?

PANCHALA.  Yes, it sounds like music, sure enough.

KANCHI.  Then at last it must be the Queen Sudarshana who is
approaching near.  [Aside to SUVARNA.] Suvarna, you must not hide and cower behind me like that.  Mind, the umbrella in your
hand is shaking!

[Enter GRANDFATHER, dressed as a warrior]

KALINGA.  Who is that?--Who are you?

PANCHALA.  Who is this that dares to enter this hall without
being invited?

VIRAT.  Amazing impudence!  Kalinga, just prevent the fellow from
advancing further.

KALINGA.  You are all my superiors in age--you are fitter to do
that than myself.

VIDARBHA.  Let us hear what he has to say.

GRANDFATHER.  The KING has come.

VIDARBHA.  [starting] King?

PANCHALA.  Which King?

KALINGA.  Where does he come from?

GRANDFATHER.  My King!

VIRAT.  Your King?

KALINGA.  Who is he?

KOSHALA.  What do you mean?

GRANDFATHER.  You all know whom I mean.  He has come.

VIDARBHA.  He has come?

KOSHALA.  With what intention?

GRANDFATHER.  He has summoned you all to come to him.

KANCHI.  Summoned us, indeed?  In what terms has he been pleased
to summon us?

GRANDFATHER.  You can take his call in any way you like--there is
none to prevent you--he is prepared to make all kinds of welcome
to suit your various tastes.

VIRAT.  But who are you?

GRANDFATHER.  I am one of his generals.

KANCHI.  Generals?  It is a lie!  Do you think of frightening us?
Do you imagine that I cannot see through your disguise?  We all
know you well--and you pose as a "general" before us!

GRANDFATHER.  You have recognised me to perfection.  Who is so
unworthy as I to bear my King's commands?  And yet it is he who
has invested me with these robes of a general and sent me here:
he has chosen me before greater generals and mightier warriors.

KANCHI.  All right, we shall go to observe the proprieties and
amenities on a fitting occasion--but at present we are in the
midst of a pressing engagement.  He will have to wait till this
little function is over.

GRANDFATHER.  When he sends out his call he does not wait.

KOSHALA.  I shall obey his call; I am going at once.

VIDARBHA.  Kanchi, I cannot agree with you in your proposal to
wait till this function is over.  I am going.

KALINGA.  You are older than I am--I shall follow you.

PANCHALA.  Look behind you, Prince of Kanchi, your regal umbrella
is lying in the dust: you have not noticed when your
umbrella-holder has stolen away.

KANCHI.  All right, general.  I too am going--but not to do him
homage.  I go to fight him on the battle-ground.

GRANDFATHER.  You will meet my King in the field of battle: that
is no mean place for your reception.

VIRAT.  Look here, friends, perhaps we are all flying before an
imagined terror--it looks as if the King of Kanchi will have the
best of it.

PANCHALA.  Possibly, when the fruit is so near the hand, it is
cowardly and foolish to go away without plucking it.

KALINGA.  It is better to join the King of Kanchi.  He cannot be
without a definite plan and purpose when he is doing and daring
so much.




XVI


[SUDARSHANA and SURANGAMA]

SUDARSHANA.  The fight is over now.  When will the King come?

SURANGAMA.  I do not know myself: I am also looking forward to
his coming.

SUDARSHANA.  I feel such a throb of joy, Surangama, that my
breast is positively aching.  But I am dying with shame too; how
shall I show my face to him?

SURANGAMA.  Go to him in utmost humility and resignation, and all
shame will vanish in a moment.

SUDARSHANA.  I cannot help confessing that I have met with my
uttermost defeat for all the rest of my life.  But pride made me
claim the largest share in his love so long.  Every one used to
say I had such wonderful beauty, such graces and virtues; every
one used to say that the King showed unlimited kindness towards
me--this is what makes it difficult for me to bend my heart in
humility before him.

SURANGAMA.  This difficulty, my Queen, will pass off.

SUDARSHANA.  Oh, yes, it will pass--the day has arrived for me to
humble myself before the whole world.  But why does not the King
come to take me back?  What more is he waiting for yet?

SURANGAMA.  Have I not told you my King is cruel and hard--very
hard indeed?

SUDARSHANA.  Go out, Surangama, and bring me news of him.

SURANGAMA.  I do not know where I should go to get any news of
him.  I have asked Grandfather to come; perhaps when he comes we
shall hear something from him.

SUDARSHANA.  Alack, my evil fate!  I have been reduced to asking
others to hear about my own King!

[Transciber's note: Alack should probably be replaced with Alas.]

[Enter GRANDFATHER]

SUDARSHANA.  I have heard that you are my King's friend, so
accept my obeisance and give me your blessings.

GRANDFATHER.  What are you doing, Queen?  I never accept
anybody's obeisance.  My relation with every one is only that of
comradeship.

SUDARSHANA.  Smile on me, then--give me good news.  Tell me when
the King is coming to take me back.

GRANDFATHER.  You ask me a hard question, indeed!  I hardly
understand yet the ways of my friend.  The battle is over, but no
one can tell where he is gone.

SUDARSHANA.  Is he gone away, then?

GRANDFATHER.  I cannot find any trace of him here.

SUDARSHANA.  Has he gone?  And do you call such a person your
friend?

GRANDFATHER.  That is why he gets people's abuse as well as
suspicion.  But my King simply does not mind it in the least.

SUDARSHANA.  Has he gone away?  Oh, oh, how hard, how cruel, how
cruel!  He is made of stone, he is hard as adamant!  I tried to
move him with my own bosom--my breast is torn and bleeding--but
him I could not move an inch!  Grandfather, tell me, how can you
manage with such a friend?

GRANDFATHER.  I have known him now--I have known him through my
griefs and joys--he can make me weep no more now.

SUDARSHANA.  Will he not let me know him also?

GRANDFATHER.  Why, he will, of course.  Nothing else will satisfy
him.

SUDARSHANA.  Very well, I shall see how hard he can be!  I shall
stay here near the window without saying a word; I shall not move
an inch; let me see if he will not come!

GRANDFATHER.  You are young still--you can afford to wait for
him; but to me, an old man, a moment's loss is a week.  I must
set out to seek him whether I succeed or not.[Exit.]

SUDARSHANA.  I do not want him--I will not seek him!  Surangama,
I have no need of your King!  Why did he fight with the princes?
Was it for me at all?  Did he want to show off his prowess and
strength?  Go away from here--I cannot bear your sight.  He has
humbled me to the dust, and is not satisfied still!




XVII


[A Band of CITIZENS]

FIRST CITIZEN.  When so many Kings met together, we thought we
were going to have some big fun; but somehow everything took such
a turn that nobody knows what happened at all!

SECOND CITIZEN.  Did you not see, they could not come to an
agreement among themselves?--every one distrusted every one else.

THIRD CITIZEN.  None kept to their original plans; one wanted to
advance, another thought it better policy to recede; some went to
the right, others made a rush to the left: how can you call that
a fight?

FIRST CITIZEN.  They had no eye to real fighting--each had his
eye on the others.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Each was thinking, "Why should I die to enable
others to reap the harvest?"

THIRD CITIZEN.  But you must all admit that Kanchi fought like a
real hero.

FIRST CITIZEN.  He for a long time after his defeat seemed loth
to acknowledge himself beaten.

SECOND CITIZEN.  He was at last fixed in the chest by a deadly
missile.

THIRD CITIZEN.  But before that he did not seem to realise that
he had been losing ground at every step.

FIRST CITIZEN.  As for the other Kings--well, nobody knows where
they fled, leaving poor Kanchi alone in the field.

SECOND CITIZEN.  But I have heard that he is not dead yet.

THIRD CITIZEN.  No, the physicians have saved him--but he will
carry the mark of his defeat on his breast till his dying day.

FIRST CITIZEN.  None of the other Kings who fled has escaped;
they have all been taken prisoners.  But what sort of justice is
this that was meted out to them?

SECOND CITIZEN.  I heard that every one was punished except
Kanchi, whom the judge placed on his right on the throne of
justice, putting a crown on his head.

THIRD CITIZEN.  This beats all mystery hollow.

SECOND CITIZEN.  This sort of justice, to speak frankly, strikes
us as fantastic and capricious.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Just so.  The greatest offender is certainly the
King of Kanchi; as for the others, greed of gain now pressed them
to advance, now they drew back in fear.

THIRD CITIZEN.  What kind of justice is this, I ask?  It is as if
the tiger got scot-free, while his tail got cut off.

SECOND CITIZEN.  If I were the judge, do you think Kanchi would
be whole and sound at this hour?  There would be nothing left of
him altogether.

THIRD CITIZEN.  They are great, high justices, my friends; their
brains are of a different stamp from ours.

FIRST CITIZEN.  Have they got any brains at all, I wonder?  They
simply indulge their sweet whims as there are none to say
anything to them from above.

SECOND CITIZEN.  Whatever you may say, if we had the governing
power in our hands we should certainly have carried on the
government much better than this.

THIRD CITIZEN.  Can there be any real doubts about that?  That of
course goes without saying.




XVIII


[The Street.  GRANDFATHER and KANCHI]

GRANDFATHER.  What, Prince of Kanchi, you here!

KANCHI.  Your King has sent me on the road.

GRANDFATHER.  That is a settled habit with him.

KANCHI.  And now, no one can get a glimpse of him.

GRANDFATHER.  That too is one of his amusements.

KANCHI.  But how long more will he elude me like this?  When
nothing could make me acknowledge him as my King, he came all of
a sudden like a terrific tempest--God knows from where--and
scattered my men and horses and banners in one wild tumult: but
now, when I am seeking the ends of the earth to pay him my humble
homage, he is nowhere to be seen.

GRANDFATHER.  But however big an Emperor he may be, he has to
submit to him that yields.  But why have you come out at night,
Prince?

KANCHI.  I still cannot get rid of the feeling of a secret dread
of being laughed at by people when they see me meekly doing my
homage to your King, acknowledging my defeat.

GRANDFATHER.  Such indeed is the people.  What would move others
to tears only serves to move their empty laughter.

KANCHI.  But you too are on the road, Grandfather.

GRANDFATHER.  This is my jolly pilgrimage to the land of losing
everything.

SINGS.

/*
  I am waiting with my all in the hope of losing everything.
  I am watching at the roadside for him who turns one out into
    the open road,
  Who hides himself and sees, who loves you unknown to you,
  I have given my heart in secret love to him,
  I am waiting with my all in the hope of losing everything.
*/




XIX


[A Road.  SUDARSHANA and SURANGAMA]

SUDARSHANA.  What a relief, Surangama, what freedom!  It is my
defeat that has brought me freedom.  Oh, what an iron pride was
mine!  Nothing could move it or soften it.  My darkened mind
could not in any way be brought to see the plain truth that it
was not the King who was to come, it was I who ought to have gone
to him.  All through yesternight I lay alone on the dusty floor
before that window--lay there through the desolate hours and
wept!  All night the southern winds blew and shrieked and moaned
like the pain that was biting at my heart; and all through it I
heard the plaintive "Speak, wife!"  of the nightbird echoing in
the tumult outside!  ...  It was the helpless wail of the dark
night, Surangama!

SURANGAMA.  Last night's heavy and melancholy air seemed to hang
on for an eternity--oh, what a dismal and gboomy night!

SUDARSHANA.  But would you believe it--I seemed to hear the soft
strains of the <i>vina</i> floating through all that wild din and
tumult!  Could he play such sweet and tender tunes, he who is so
cruel and terrible?  The world knows only my indignity and
ignominy--but none but my own heart could hear those strains that
called me through the lone and wailing night.  Did you too,
Surangama, hear the <i>vina</i>?  Or was that but a dream of mine?

SURANGAMA.  But it is just to hear that same <i>vina</i>'s music
that I am always by your side.  It is for this call of music,
which I knew would one day come to dissolve all the barriers of
love, that I have all along been listening with an eager ear.

SUDARSHANA.  He did at last send me on the open road--I could not
withstand his will.  When I shall find him, the first words that
I shall tell him will be, "I have come of my own will--I have not
awaited your coming."  I shall say, "For your sake have I trodden
the hard and weary roads, and bitter and ceaseless has been my
weeping all the way."  I shall at least have this pride in me
when I meet him.

SURANGAMA.  But even that pride will not last.  He came before
you did--who else could have sent you on the road?

SUDARSHANA.  Perhaps he did.  As long as a sense of offended
pride remained with me, I could not help thinking that he had
left me for good; but when I flung my dignity and pride to the
winds and came out on the common streets, then it seemed to me
that he too had come out: I have been finding him since the
moment I was on the road.  I have no misgivings now.  All this
suffering that I have gone through for his sake, the very
bitternesss of all this is giving me his company.  Ah! yes, he
has come--he has held me by the hand, just as he used to do in
that chamber of darkness, when, at his touch, all my body would
start with a sudden thrill: it is the same, the same touch again!
Who says that he is not here?--Surangama, can you not see that he
has come, in silence and secret? ...  Who is that there?  Look,
Surangama, there is a third traveller of this dark road at this
hour of the night.

SURANGAMA.  I see, it is the King of Kanchi, my Queen.

SUDARSHANA.  King of Kanchi!

SURANGAMA.  Don't be afraid, my Queen!

SUDARSHANA.  Afraid!  Why should I be afraid?  The days of fear
are gone for ever for me.

KANCHI.  [entering] Queen-mother, I see you two on this road!  I
am a traveller of the same path as yourself.  Have no fear of me,
O Queen!

SUDARSHANA.  It is well, King of Kanchi, that we should be going
together, side by side--this is but right.  I came on your way
when I first left my home, and now I meet you again on my way
back.  Who could have dreamed that this meeting of ours would
augur so well?

KANCHI.  But, Queen-mother, it is not meet that you should walk
over this road on foot.  Will you permit me to get a chariot for
you?

SUDARSHANA.  Oh, do not say so: I shall never be happy if I could
not on my way back home tread on the dust of the road that led me
away from my King.  I would be deceiving myself if I were now to
go in a chariot.

SURANGAMA.  King, you too are walking in the dust to-day: this
road has never known anybody driving his horse or chariot over
it.

SUDARSHANA.  When I was the Queen, I stepped over silver and
gold--I shall have now to atone for the evil fortune of my birth
by walking over dust and bare earth.  I could not have dreamed
that thus I would meet my King of common earth and dust at every
step of mine to-day.

SURANGAMA.  Look, my Queen, there on the eastern horizon comes
the dawn.  We have not long to walk: I see the spires of the
golden turrets of the King's palace.

[Enter GRANDFATHER]

GRANDFATHER.  My child, it is dawn--at last!

SUDARSHANA.  Your benedictions have given me Godspeed, and here I
am, at last.

GRANDFATHER.  But do you see how ill-mannered our King is?  He
has sent no chariot, no music band, nothing splendid or grand.

SUDARSHANA.  Nothing grand, did you say?  Look, the sky is rosy
and crimson from end to end, the air is full of the welcome of
the scent of flowers.

GRANDFATHER.  Yes, but however cruel our King may be, we cannot
seek to emulate him: I cannot help feeling pain at seeing you in
this state, my child.  How can we bear to see you going to the
King's palace attired in this poor and wretched attire?  Wait a
little--I am running to fetch you your Queen's garments.

SUDARSHANA.  Oh no, no, no!  He has taken away those regal robes
from me for ever--he has attired me in a servant's dress before
the eyes of the whole world: what a relief this has been to me!
I am his servant now, no longer his Queen.  To-day I stand at the
feet of all those who can claim any relationship with him.

GRANDFATHER.  But your enemies will laugh at you now: how can you
bear their derision?

SUDARSHANA.  Let their laughter and derision be immortal--let
them throw dust at me in the streets: this dust will to-day be
the powder with which I shall deck myself before meeting my lord.

GRANDFATHER.  After this, we shall say nothing.  Now let us play
the last game of our Spring Festival--instead of the pollen of
flowers let the south breeze blow and scatter dust of lowliness
in every direction!  We shall go to the lord clad in the common
grey of the dust.  And we shall find him too covered with dust
all over.  For do you think the people spare him?  Even he cannot
escape from their soiled and dusty hands, and he does not even
care to brush the dirt off his garments.

KANCHI.  Grandfather, do not forget me in this game of yours!  I
also will have to get this royal garment of mine soiled till it
is beyond all recognition.

GRANDFATHER.  That will not take long, my brother.  Now that you
have come down so far--you will change your colour in no time.
Just look at our Queen--she got into a temper with herself and
thought that she could spoil her matchless beauty by flinging
away all her ornaments: but this insult to her beauty has made it
shine forth in tenfold radiance, and now it is in its unadorned
perfection.  We hear that our King is all innocent of beauty--
that is why he loves all his manifold beauty of form which shines
as the very ornament of his breast.  And that beauty has to-day
taken off its veil and cloak of pride and vanity!  What could I
not give to be allowed to hear the wonderful music and song that
has filled my King's palace to-day!

SURANGAMA.  Lo, there rises the sun!




XX


[The Dark Chamber]

SUDARSHANA.  Lord, do not give me back the honour which you once
did turn away from me!  I am the servant of your feet--I only
seek the privilege of serving you.

KING.  Will you be able to bear me now?

SUDARSHANA.  Oh yes, yes, I shall.  Your sigh repelled me because
I had sought to find you in the pleasure garden, in my Queen's
chambers: there even your meanest servant looks handsomer than
you.  That fever of longing has left my eyes for ever.  You are
not beautiful, my lord--you stand beyond all comparisons!

KING.  That which can be comparable with me lies within yourself.

SUDARSHANA.  If this be so, then that too is beyond comparison.
Your love lives in me--you are mirrored in that love, and you see
your face reflected in me: nothing of this mine, it is all yours,
O lord!

KING.  I open the doors of this dark room to-day--the game is
finished here!  Come, come with me now, come outside--<i>into the
light!</i>

SUDARSHANA.  Before I go, let me bow at the feet of my lord of
darkness, my cruel, my terrible, my peerless one!




THE END







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING OF THE DARK CHAMBER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mashi, and Other Stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mashi, and Other Stories

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: December 27, 2010 [eBook #34757]
                Most recently updated: January 7, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Sharon Joiner, Jana Srna and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASHI, AND OTHER STORIES ***




Produced by Sharon Joiner, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






  [ Transcriber's Note:

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation;
    changes (corrections of spelling and punctuation) made to the
    original text are listed at the end of this file.

    Italic text has been marked with _underscores_.
    Bold text has been marked with =equals signs=.

    A and a with macron have been replaced with Â and â, respectively.
  ]




WORKS BY SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE


=GITANJALI (Song Offerings).= Translated by the Author. With an
Introduction by W. B. YEATS and a Portrait by W. ROTHENSTEIN. Cr.
8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=FRUIT-GATHERING. A Sequel to "Gitanjali."= 4s. 6d. net.

=STRAY BIRDS. Poems.= Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=THE GARDENER. Lyrics of Love and Life.= Translated by the Author. With
Portrait. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=THE CRESCENT MOON. Child-Poems.= Translated by the Author. With 8
Illustrations in Colour. Pott 4to. 4s. 6d. net.

=LOVER'S GIFT AND CROSSING.= Cr. 8vo.

=CHITRA. A Play.= Translated by the Author. Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.

=THE KING OF THE DARK CHAMBER. A Play.= Translated by KSHITISH CHANDRA
SEN. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=THE POST OFFICE. A Play.= Translated by DEVABRATA MUKERJEA. Cr. 8vo.
2s. 6d. net.

=THE CYCLE OF SPRING. A Play.= Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

=SACRIFICE AND OTHER PLAYS.= Cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

=HUNGRY STONES AND OTHER STORIES.= 5s. net.

=MASHI AND OTHER STORIES.= Cr. 8vo.

=PERSONALITY: Lectures delivered in America.= With Illustrations. Ex.
cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

=MY REMINISCENCES.= By Sir RABINDRANATH TAGORE. Illustrated. Ex. cr.
8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=NATIONALISM.= Ex. cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

=SÂDHANÂ: The Realisation of Life. Lectures.= Ex. cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

                   *       *       *       *       *

=ONE HUNDRED POEMS OF KABIR.= Translated by Sir RABINDRANATH TAGORE.
Assisted by EVELYN UNDERHILL. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd.




  MASHI
  AND OTHER STORIES




  MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited

  LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA · MADRAS
  MELBOURNE


  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
  DALLAS · SAN FRANCISCO


  THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.

  TORONTO




  MASHI
  AND OTHER STORIES

  BY
  Sir RABINDRANATH TAGORE

  TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL BENGALI
  BY VARIOUS WRITERS

  MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
  ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
  1918




COPYRIGHT




CONTENTS


                           PAGE

  Mashi                       3

  The Skeleton               31

  The Auspicious Vision      49

  The Supreme Night          61

  Raja and Rani              77

  The Trust Property         87

  The Riddle solved         107

  The Elder Sister          123

  Subha                     145

  The Postmaster            159

  The River Stairs          173

  The Castaway              185

  Saved                     207

  My Fair Neighbour         215




MASHI


I

'Mashi!'[1]

  [1] The maternal aunt is addressed as Mashi.

'Try to sleep, Jotin, it is getting late.'

'Never mind if it is. I have not many days left. I was thinking that
Mani should go to her father's house.--I forget where he is now.'

'Sitarampur.'

'Oh yes! Sitarampur. Send her there. She should not remain any longer
near a sick man. She herself is not strong.'

'Just listen to him! How can she bear to leave you in this state?'

'Does she know what the doctors----?'

'But she can see for herself! The other day she cried her eyes out at
the merest hint of having to go to her father's house.'

We must explain that in this statement there was a slight distortion
of truth, to say the least of it. The actual talk with Mani was as
follows:--

                   *       *       *       *       *

'I suppose, my child, you have got some news from your father? I
thought I saw your cousin Anath here.'

'Yes! Next Friday will be my little sister's _annaprashan_[2]
ceremony. So I'm thinking----'

  [2] The _annaprashan_ ceremony takes place when a child is first given
  rice. Usually it receives its name on that day.

'All right, my dear. Send her a gold necklace. It will please your
mother.'

'I'm thinking of going myself. I've never seen my little sister, and
I want to ever so much.'

'Whatever do you mean? You surely don't think of leaving Jotin alone?
Haven't you heard what the doctor says about him?'

'But he said that just now there's no special cause for----'

'Even if he did, you can see his state.'

'This is the first girl after three brothers, and she's a great
favourite.--I have heard that it's going to be a grand affair. If I
don't go, mother will be very----'

'Yes, yes! I don't understand your mother. But I know very well that
your father will be angry enough if you leave Jotin just now.'

'You'll have to write a line to him saying that there is no special
cause for anxiety, and that even if I go, there will be no----'

'You're right there; it will certainly be no great loss if you do go.
But remember, if I write to your father, I'll tell him plainly what
is in my mind.'

'Then you needn't write. I shall ask my husband, and he will
surely----'

'Look here, child, I've borne a good deal from you, but if you do
that, I won't stand it for a moment. Your father knows you too well
for you to deceive him.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Mashi had left her, Mani lay down on her bed in a bad temper.

Her neighbour and friend came and asked what was the matter.

'Look here! What a shame it is! Here's my only sister's _annaprashan_
coming, and they don't want to let me go to it!'

'Why! Surely you're never thinking of going, are you, with your
husband so ill?'

'I don't do anything for him, and I couldn't if I tried. It's so
deadly dull in this house, that I tell you frankly I can't bear it.'

'You are a strange woman!'

'But I can't pretend, as you people do, and look glum lest any one
should think ill of me.'

'Well, tell me your plan.'

'I must go. Nobody can prevent me.'

'Isss! What an imperious young woman you are!'


II

Hearing that Mani had wept at the mere thought of going to her father's
house, Jotin was so excited that he sat up in bed. Pulling his pillow
towards him, he leaned back, and said: 'Mashi, open this window a
little, and take that lamp away.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

The still night stood silently at the window like a pilgrim of
eternity; and the stars gazed in, witnesses through untold ages of
countless death-scenes.

Jotin saw his Mani's face traced on the background of the dark night,
and saw those two big dark eyes brimming over with tears, as it were
for all eternity.

Mashi felt relieved when she saw him so quiet, thinking he was asleep.

Suddenly he started up, and said: 'Mashi, you all thought that Mani
was too frivolous ever to be happy in our house. But you see now----'

'Yes, I see now, my Baba,[3] I was mistaken--but trial tests a
person.'

  [3] Baba literally means Father, but is often used by elders as a term
  of endearment. In the same way 'Ma' is used.

'Mashi!'

'Do try to sleep, dear!'

'Let me think a little, let me talk. Don't be vexed, Mashi!'

'Very well.'

'Once, when I used to think I could not win Mani's heart, I bore it
silently. But you----'

'No, dear, I won't allow you to say that; I also bore it.'

'Our minds, you know, are not clods of earth which you can possess
by merely picking up. I felt that Mani did not know her own mind, and
that one day at some great shock----'

'Yes, Jotin, you are right.'

'Therefore I never took much notice of her waywardness.'

Mashi remained silent, suppressing a sigh. Not once, but often she
had seen Jotin spending the night on the verandah wet with the
splashing rain, yet not caring to go into his bedroom. Many a day
he lay with a throbbing head, longing, she knew, that Mani would
come and soothe his brow, while Mani was getting ready to go to the
theatre. Yet when Mashi went to fan him, he sent her away petulantly.
She alone knew what pain lay hidden in that distress. Again and again
she had wanted to say to Jotin: 'Don't pay so much attention to that
silly child, my dear; let her learn to want,--to cry for things.'
But these things cannot be said, and are apt to be misunderstood.
Jotin had in his heart a shrine set up to the goddess Woman, and
there Mani had her throne. It was hard for him to imagine that his
own fate was to be denied his share of the wine of love poured out
by that divinity. Therefore the worship went on, the sacrifice was
offered, and the hope of a boon never ceased.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Mashi imagined once more that Jotin was sleeping, when he cried out
suddenly:

'I know you thought that I was not happy with Mani, and therefore you
were angry with her. But, Mashi, happiness is like those stars. They
don't cover all the darkness; there are gaps between. We make mistakes
in life and we misunderstand, and yet there remain gaps through which
truth shines. I do not know whence comes this gladness that fills my
heart to-night.'

Mashi began gently to soothe Jotin's brow, her tears unseen in the dark.

'I was thinking, Mashi, she's so young! What will she do when I
am----?'

'Young, Jotin? She's old enough. I too was young when I lost the idol
of my life, only to find him in my heart for ever. Was that any loss,
do you think? Besides, is happiness absolutely necessary?'

'Mashi, it seems as if just when Mani's heart shows signs of awakening
I have to----'

'Don't you worry about that, Jotin. Isn't it enough if her heart
awakes?'

Suddenly Jotin recollected the words of a village minstrel's song which
he had heard long before:

    O my heart! you woke not when the man of my heart came to my door.
    At the sound of his departing steps you woke up.
    Oh, you woke up in the dark!

'Mashi, what is the time now?'

'About nine.'

'So early as that! Why, I thought it must be at least two or three
o'clock. My midnight, you know, begins at sundown. But why did you want
me to sleep, then?'

'Why, you know how late last night you kept awake talking; so to-day
you must get to sleep early.'

'Is Mani asleep?'

'Oh no, she's busy making some soup for you.'

'You don't mean to say so, Mashi? Does she----?'

'Certainly! Why, she prepares all your food, the busy little woman.'

'I thought perhaps Mani could not----'

'It doesn't take long for a woman to learn such things. With the need
it comes of itself.'

'The fish soup, that I had in the morning, had such a delicate
flavour, I thought you had made it.'

'Dear me, no! Surely you don't think Mani would let me do anything
for you? Why, she does all your washing herself. She knows you can't
bear anything dirty about you. If only you could see your sitting-room,
how spick and span she keeps it! If I were to let her haunt your
sick-room, she would wear herself out. But that's what she really wants
to do.'

'Is Mani's health, then----?'

'The doctors think she should not be allowed to visit the sick-room
too often. She's too tender-hearted.'

'But, Mashi, how do you prevent her from coming?'

'Because she obeys me implicitly. But still I have constantly to be
giving her news of you.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

The stars glistened in the sky like tear-drops. Jotin bowed his head
in gratitude to his life that was about to depart, and when Death
stretched out his right hand towards him through the darkness, he
took it in perfect trust.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Jotin sighed, and, with a slight gesture of impatience, said:

'Mashi, if Mani is still awake, then, could I--if only for a----?'

'Very well! I'll go and call her.'

'I won't keep her long, only for five minutes. I have something
particular to tell her.'

Mashi, sighing, went out to call Mani. Meanwhile Jotin's pulse began
to beat fast. He knew too well that he had never been able to have an
intimate talk with Mani. The two instruments were tuned differently
and it was not easy to play them in unison. Again and again, Jotin had
felt pangs of jealousy on hearing Mani chattering and laughing
merrily with her girl companions. Jotin blamed only himself,--why
couldn't he talk irrelevant trifles as they did? Not that he could
not, for with his men friends he often chatted on all sorts of
trivialities. But the small talk that suits men is not suitable for
women. You can hold a philosophical discourse in monologue, ignoring
your inattentive audience altogether, but small talk requires the
co-operation of at least two. The bagpipes can be played singly, but
there must be a pair of cymbals. How often in the evenings had Jotin,
when sitting on the open verandah with Mani, made some strained
attempts at conversation, only to feel the thread snap. And the very
silence of the evening felt ashamed. Jotin was certain that Mani
longed to get away. He had even wished earnestly that a third person
would come. For talking is easy with three, when it is hard for two.

He began to think what he should say when Mani came. But such
manufactured talk would not satisfy him. Jotin felt afraid that this
five minutes of to-night would be wasted. Yet, for him, there were
but few moments left for intimate talk.


III

'What's this, child, you're not going anywhere, are you?'

'Of course, I'm going to Sitarampur.'

'What do you mean? Who is going to take you?'

'Anath.'

'Not to-day, my child, some other day.'

'But the compartment has already been reserved.'

'What does that matter? That loss can easily be borne. Go to-morrow,
early in the morning.'

'Mashi, I don't hold by your inauspicious days. What harm if I do go
to-day?'

'Jotin wants to have a talk with you.'

'All right! there's still some time. I'll just go and see him.'

'But you mustn't say that you are going.'

'Very well, I won't tell him, but I shan't be able to stay long.
To-morrow is my sister's _annaprashan_, and I must go to-day.'

'Oh, my child! I beg you to listen to me this once. Quiet your mind
for a while and sit by him. Don't let him see your hurry.'

'What can I do? The train won't wait for me. Anath will be back in
ten minutes. I can sit by him till then.'

'No, that won't do. I shall never let you go to him in that frame of
mind.... Oh, you wretch! the man you are torturing is soon to leave
this world; but I warn you, you will remember this day till the end
of your days! That there is a God! that there is a God! you will some
day understand!'

'Mashi, you mustn't curse me like that.'

'Oh, my darling boy! my darling! why do you go on living longer? There
is no end to this sin, yet I cannot check it!'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Mashi after delaying a little returned to the sick-room, hoping by
that time Jotin would be asleep. But Jotin moved in his bed when she
entered. Mashi exclaimed:

'Just look what she has done!'

'What's happened? Hasn't Mani come? Why have you been so long, Mashi?'

'I found her weeping bitterly because she had allowed the milk for
your soup to get burnt! I tried to console her, saying, "Why, there's
more milk to be had!" But that she could be so careless about the
preparation of _your_ soup made her wild. With great trouble I managed
to pacify her and put her to bed. So I haven't brought her to-day. Let
her sleep it off.'

Though Jotin was pained when Mani didn't come, yet he felt a certain
amount of relief. He had half feared that Mani's bodily presence
would do violence to his heart's image of her. Such things had
happened before in his life. And the gladness of the idea that Mani
was miserable at burning _his_ milk filled his heart to overflowing.

'Mashi!'

'What is it, Baba?'

'I feel quite certain that my days are drawing to a close. But I have
no regrets. Don't grieve for me.'

'No, dear, I won't grieve. I don't believe that only life is good and
not death.'

'Mashi, I tell you truly that death seems sweet.'

Jotin, gazing at the dark sky, felt that it was Mani herself who
was coming to him in Death's guise. She had immortal youth and the
stars were flowers of blessing, showered upon her dark tresses by
the hand of the World-Mother. It seemed as if once more he had his
first sight of his bride under the veil of darkness.[4] The immense
night became filled with the loving gaze of Mani's dark eyes. Mani,
the bride of this house, the little girl, became transformed into a
world-image,--her throne on the altar of the stars at the confluence
of life and death. Jotin said to himself with clasped hands: 'At
last the veil is raised, the covering is rent in this deep darkness.
Ah, beautiful one! how often have you wrung my heart, but no longer
shall you forsake me!'

  [4] The bride and the bridegroom see each other's face for the first
  time at the marriage ceremony under a veil thrown over their heads.


IV

'I'm suffering, Mashi, but nothing like you imagine. It seems to me
as if my pain were gradually separating itself from my life. Like
a laden boat, it was so long being towed behind, but the rope has
snapped, and now it floats away with all my burdens. Still I can see
it, but it is no longer mine.... But, Mashi, I've not seen Mani even
once for the last two days!'

'Jotin, let me give you another pillow.'

'It almost seems to me, Mashi, that Mani also has left me like that
laden boat of sorrow which drifts away.'

'Just sip some pomegranate juice, dear! Your throat must be getting
dry.'

'I wrote my will yesterday; did I show it to you? I can't recollect.'

'There's no need to show it to me, Jotin.'

'When mother died, I had nothing of my own. You fed me and brought me
up. Therefore I was saying----'

'Nonsense, child! I had only this house and a little property. You
earned the rest.'

'But this house----?'

'That's nothing. Why, you've added to it so much that it's difficult
to find out where my house was!'

'I'm sure Mani's love for you is really----'

'Yes, yes! I know that, Jotin. Now you try to sleep.'

'Though I have bequeathed all my property to Mani, it is practically
yours, Mashi. She will never disobey you.'

'Why are you worrying so much about that, dear?'

'All I have I owe to you. When you see my will don't think for a
moment that----'

'What do you mean, Jotin? Do you think I shall mind for a moment
because you give to Mani what belongs to you? Surely I'm not so mean
as that?'

'But you also will have----'

'Look here, Jotin, I shall get angry with you. You want to console me
with money!'

'Oh, Mashi, how I wish I could give you something better than money!'

'That you have done, Jotin!--more than enough. Haven't I had you to
fill my lonely house? I must have won that great good-fortune in
many previous births! You have given me so much that now, if my
destiny's due is exhausted, I shall not complain. Yes, yes! Give away
everything in Mani's name,--your house, your money, your carriage,
and your land--such burdens are too heavy for me!'

'Of course I know you have lost your taste for the enjoyments of life,
but Mani is so young that----'

'No! you mustn't say that. If you want to leave her your property,
it is all right, but as for enjoyment----'

'What harm if she does enjoy herself, Mashi?'

'No, no, it will be impossible. Her throat will become parched, and
it will be dust and ashes to her.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Jotin remained silent. He could not decide whether it was true or not,
and whether it was a matter of regret or otherwise, that the world
would become distasteful to Mani for want of him. The stars seemed
to whisper in his heart:

'Indeed it is true. We have been watching for thousands of years, and
know that all these great preparations for enjoyment are but vanity.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Jotin sighed and said: 'We cannot leave behind us what is really worth
giving.'

'It's no trifle you are giving, dearest. I only pray she may have the
power to know the value of what is given her.'

'Give me a little more of that pomegranate juice, Mashi, I'm thirsty.
Did Mani come to me yesterday, I wonder?'

'Yes, she came, but you were asleep. She sat by your head, fanning
you for a long time, and then went away to get your clothes washed.'

'How wonderful! I believe I was dreaming that very moment that Mani
was trying to enter my room. The door was slightly open, and she was
pushing against it, but it wouldn't open. But, Mashi, you're going too
far,--you ought to let her see that I am dying; otherwise my death will
be a terrible shock to her.'

'Baba, let me put this shawl over your feet; they are getting cold.'

'No, Mashi, I can't bear anything over me like that.'

'Do you know, Jotin, Mani made this shawl for you? When she ought to
have been asleep, she was busy at it. It was finished only yesterday.'

Jotin took the shawl, and touched it tenderly with his hands. It
seemed to him that the softness of the wool was Mani's own. Her loving
thoughts had been woven night after night with its threads. It was
not made merely of wool, but also of her touch. Therefore, when Mashi
drew that shawl over his feet, it seemed as if, night after night,
Mani had been caressing his tired limbs.

'But, Mashi, I thought Mani didn't know how to knit,--at any rate she
never liked it.'

'It doesn't take long to learn a thing. Of course I had to teach her.
Then there are a good many mistakes in it.'

'Let there be mistakes; we're not going to send it to the Paris
Exhibition. It will keep my feet warm in spite of its mistakes.'

Jotin's mind began to picture Mani at her task, blundering and
struggling, and yet patiently going on night after night. How sweetly
pathetic it was! And again he went over the shawl with his caressing
fingers.

'Mashi, is the doctor downstairs?'

'Yes, he will stay here to-night.'

'But tell him it is useless for him to give me a sleeping draught. It
doesn't bring me real rest and only adds to my pain. Let me remain
properly awake. Do you know, Mashi, that my wedding took place on the
night of the full moon in the month of _Baisakh_? To-morrow will be
that day, and the stars of that very night will be shining in the
sky. Mani perhaps has forgotten. I want to remind her of it to-day;
just call her to me for a minute or two.... Why do you keep silent?
I suppose the doctor has told you I am so weak that any excitement
will----but I tell you truly, Mashi, to-night, if I can have only a
few minutes' talk with her, there will be no need for any sleeping
draughts. Mashi, don't cry like that! I am quite well. To-day my heart
is full as it has never been in my life before. That's why I want
to see Mani. No, no, Mashi, I can't bear to see you crying! You have
been so quiet all these last days. Why are you so troubled to-night?'

'Oh, Jotin, I thought that I had exhausted all my tears, but I find
there are plenty left. I can't bear it any longer.'

'Call Mani. I'll remind her of our wedding night, so that to-morrow
she may----'

'I'm going, dear. Shombhu will wait at the door. If you want anything,
call him.'

Mashi went to Mani's bedroom and sat down on the floor crying,--'Oh
come, come once, you heartless wretch! Keep his last request who has
given you his all! Don't kill him who is already dying!'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Jotin hearing the sound of footsteps started up, saying, 'Mani!'

'I am Shombhu. Did you call me?'

'Ask your mistress to come?'

'Ask whom?'

'Your mistress.'

'She has not yet returned.'

'Returned? From where?'

'From Sitarampur.'

'When did she go?'

'Three days ago.'

For a moment Jotin felt numb all over, and his head began to swim. He
slipped down from the pillows, on which he was reclining, and kicked
off the woollen shawl that was over his feet.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Mashi came back after a long time, Jotin did not mention Mani's
name, and Mashi thought he had forgotten all about her.

Suddenly Jotin cried out: 'Mashi, did I tell you about the dream I
had the other night?'

'Which dream?'

'That in which Mani was pushing the door, and the door wouldn't open
more than an inch. She stood outside unable to enter. Now I know that
Mani has to stand outside my door till the last.'

                   *       *       *       *       *

Mashi kept silent. She realised that the heaven she had been building
for Jotin out of falsehood had toppled down at last. If sorrow comes,
it is best to acknowledge it.--When God strikes, we cannot avoid the
blow.

'Mashi, the love I have got from you will last through all my births.
I have filled this life with it to carry it with me. In the next birth,
I am sure you will be born as my daughter, and I shall tend you with
all my love.'

'What are you saying, Jotin? Do you mean to say I shall be born again
as a woman? Why can't you pray that I should come to your arms as a
son?'

'No, no, not a son! You will come to my house in that wonderful beauty
which you had when you were young. I can even imagine how I shall
dress you.'

'Don't talk so much, Jotin, but try to sleep.'

'I shall name you "Lakshmi."'

'But that is an old-fashioned name, Jotin!'

'Yes, but you are my old-fashioned Mashi. Come to my house again with
those beautiful old-fashioned manners.'

'I can't wish that I should come and burden your home with the
misfortune of a girl-child!'

'Mashi, you think me weak, and are wanting to save me all trouble.'

'My child, I am a woman, so I have my weakness. Therefore I have tried
all my life to save you from all sorts of trouble,--only to fail.'

'Mashi, I have not had time in this life to apply the lessons I have
learnt. But they will keep for my next birth. I shall show then what a
man is able to do. I have learnt how false it is always to be looking
after oneself.'

'Whatever you may say, darling, you have never grasped anything for
yourself, but given everything to others.'

'Mashi, I can boast of one thing at any rate. I have never been a
tyrant in my happiness, or tried to enforce my claims by violence.
Because lies could not content me, I have had to wait long. Perhaps
truth will be kind to me at last.--Who is that, Mashi, who is that?'

'Where? There's no one there, Jotin!'

'Mashi, just go and see in the other room. I thought I----'

'No, dear! I don't see anybody.'

'But it seemed quite clear to me that----'

'No, Jotin, it's nothing. So keep quiet! The doctor is coming now.'

When the doctor entered, he said:

'Look here, you mustn't stay near the patient so much, you excite him.
You go to bed, and my assistant will remain with him.'

'No, Mashi, I can't let you go.'

'All right, Baba! I will sit quietly in that corner.'

'No, no! you must sit by my side. I can't let go your hand, not till
the very end. I have been made by your hand, and only from your hand
shall God take me.'

'All right,' said the doctor, 'you can remain there. But, Jotin
Babu, you must not talk to her. It's time for you to take your
medicine.'

'Time for my medicine? Nonsense! The time for that is over. To give
medicine now is merely to deceive; besides I am not afraid to die.
Mashi, Death is busy with his physic; why do you add another nuisance
in the shape of a doctor? Send him away, send him away! It is you alone
I need now! No one else, none whatever! No more falsehood!'

'I protest, as a doctor, this excitement is doing you harm.'

'Then go, doctor, don't excite me any more!--Mashi, has he gone?...
That's good! Now come and take my head in your lap.'

'All right, dear! Now, Baba, try to sleep!'

'No, Mashi, don't ask me to sleep. If I sleep, I shall never wake.
I still need to keep awake a little longer. Don't you hear a sound?
Somebody is coming.'


V

'Jotin dear, just open your eyes a little. She has come. Look once
and see!'

'Who has come? A dream?'

'Not a dream, darling! Mani has come with her father.'

'Who are you?'

'Can't you see? This is your Mani!'

'Mani? Has that door opened?'

'Yes, Baba, it is wide open.'

'No, Mashi, not that shawl! not _that_ shawl! That shawl is a fraud!'

'It is not a shawl, Jotin! It is our Mani, who has flung herself on
your feet. Put your hand on her head and bless her. Don't cry like
that, Mani! There will be time enough for that. Keep quiet now for a
little.'




THE SKELETON


In the room next to the one in which we boys used to sleep, there hung
a human skeleton. In the night it would rattle in the breeze which
played about its bones. In the day these bones were rattled by us.
We were taking lessons in osteology from a student in the Campbell
Medical School, for our guardians were determined to make us masters
of all the sciences. How far they succeeded we need not tell those
who know us; and it is better hidden from those who do not.

Many years have passed since then. In the meantime the skeleton has
vanished from the room, and the science of osteology from our brains,
leaving no trace behind.

The other day, our house was crowded with guests, and I had to pass
the night in the same old room. In these now unfamiliar surroundings,
sleep refused to come, and, as I tossed from side to side, I heard all
the hours of the night chimed, one after another, by the church clock
near by. At length the lamp in the corner of the room, after some
minutes of choking and spluttering, went out altogether. One or two
bereavements had recently happened in the family, so the going out
of the lamp naturally led me to thoughts of death. In the great arena
of nature, I thought, the light of a lamp losing itself in eternal
darkness, and the going out of the light of our little human lives,
by day or by night, were much the same thing.

My train of thought recalled to my mind the skeleton. While I was
trying to imagine what the body which had clothed it could have
been like, it suddenly seemed to me that something was walking
round and round my bed, groping along the walls of the room. I could
hear its rapid breathing. It seemed as if it was searching for
something which it could not find, and pacing round the room with
ever-hastier steps. I felt quite sure that this was a mere fancy of
my sleepless, excited brain; and that the throbbing of the veins in
my temples was really the sound which seemed like running footsteps.
Nevertheless, a cold shiver ran all over me. To help to get rid of
this hallucination, I called out aloud: 'Who is there?' The footsteps
seemed to stop at my bedside, and the reply came: 'It is I. I have
come to look for that skeleton of mine.'

It seemed absurd to show any fear before the creature of my own
imagination; so, clutching my pillow a little more tightly, I said
in a casual sort of way: 'A nice business for this time of night! Of
what use will that skeleton be to you now?'

The reply seemed to come almost from my mosquito-curtain itself.
'What a question! In that skeleton were the bones that encircled
my heart; the youthful charm of my six-and-twenty years bloomed about
it. Should I not desire to see it once more?'

'Of course,' said I, 'a perfectly reasonable desire. Well, go on
with your search, while I try to get a little sleep.'

Said the voice: 'But I fancy you are lonely. All right; I'll sit down
a while, and we will have a little chat. Years ago I used to sit by men
and talk to them. But during the last thirty-five years I have only
moaned in the wind in the burning-places of the dead. I would talk
once more with a man as in the old times.'

I felt that some one sat down just near my curtain. Resigning myself to
the situation, I replied with as much cordiality as I could summon:
'That will be very nice indeed. Let us talk of something cheerful.'

'The funniest thing I can think of is my own life-story. Let me tell
you that.'

The church clock chimed the hour of two.

'When I was in the land of the living, and young, I feared one thing
like death itself, and that was my husband. My feelings can be likened
only to those of a fish caught with a hook. For it was as if a stranger
had snatched me away with the sharpest of hooks from the peaceful
calm of my childhood's home--and from him I had no means of escape.
My husband died two months after my marriage, and my friends and
relations moaned pathetically on my behalf. My husband's father, after
scrutinising my face with great care, said to my mother-in-law: "Do
you not see, she has the evil eye?"--Well, are you listening? I hope
you are enjoying the story?'

'Very much indeed!' said I. 'The beginning is extremely humorous.'

'Let me proceed then. I came back to my father's house in great glee.
People tried to conceal it from me, but I knew well that I was endowed
with a rare and radiant beauty. What is your opinion?'

'Very likely,' I murmured. 'But you must remember that I never saw
you.'

'What! Not seen me? What about that skeleton of mine? Ha! ha! ha!
Never mind. I was only joking. How can I ever make you believe
that those two cavernous hollows contained the brightest of dark,
languishing eyes? And that the smile which was revealed by those ruby
lips had no resemblance whatever to the grinning teeth which you used
to see? The mere attempt to convey to you some idea of the grace,
the charm, the soft, firm, dimpled curves, which in the fulness of
youth were growing and blossoming over those dry old bones makes me
smile; it also makes me angry. The most eminent doctors of my time
could not have dreamed of the bones of that body of mine as materials
for teaching osteology. Do you know, one young doctor that I knew of,
actually compared me to a golden _champak_ blossom. It meant that to
him the rest of humankind was fit only to illustrate the science
of physiology, that I was a flower of beauty. Does any one think of
the skeleton of a _champak_ flower?

'When I walked, I felt that, like a diamond scattering splendour,
my every movement set waves of beauty radiating on every side. I used
to spend hours gazing on my hands--hands which could gracefully have
reined the liveliest of male creatures.

'But that stark and staring old skeleton of mine has borne
false-witness to you against me, while I was unable to refute the
shameless libel. That is why of all men I hate you most! I feel I
would like once for all to banish sleep from your eyes with a
vision of that warm rosy loveliness of mine, to sweep out with it
all the wretched osteological stuff of which your brain is full.'

'I could have sworn by your body,' cried I, 'if you had it still,
that no vestige of osteology has remained in my head, and that the only
thing that it is now full of is a radiant vision of perfect loveliness,
glowing against the black background of night. I cannot say more than
that.'

'I had no girl-companions,' went on the voice. 'My only brother
had made up his mind not to marry. In the zenana I was alone. Alone I
used to sit in the garden under the shade of the trees, and dream
that the whole world was in love with me; that the stars with sleepless
gaze were drinking in my beauty; that the wind was languishing in
sighs as on some pretext or other it brushed past me; and that the
lawn on which my feet rested, had it been conscious, would have lost
consciousness again at their touch. It seemed to me that all the young
men in the world were as blades of grass at my feet; and my heart, I
know not why, used to grow sad.

'When my brother's friend, Shekhar, had passed out of the Medical
College, he became our family doctor. I had already often seen him from
behind a curtain. My brother was a strange man, and did not care to
look on the world with open eyes. It was not empty enough for his
taste; so he gradually moved away from it, until he was quite lost in
an obscure corner. Shekhar was his one friend, so he was the only
young man I could ever get to see. And when I held my evening court in
my garden, then the host of imaginary young men whom I had at my feet
were each one a Shekhar.--Are you listening? What are you thinking of?'

I sighed as I replied: 'I was wishing I was Shekhar!'

'Wait a bit. Hear the whole story first. One day, in the rains, I
was feverish. The doctor came to see me. That was our first meeting.
I was reclining opposite the window, so that the blush of the evening
sky might temper the pallor of my complexion. When the doctor, coming
in, looked up into my face, I put myself into his place, and gazed
at myself in imagination. I saw in the glorious evening light that
delicate wan face laid like a drooping flower against the soft white
pillow, with the unrestrained curls playing over the forehead, and the
bashfully lowered eyelids casting a pathetic shade over the whole
countenance.

'The doctor, in a tone bashfully low, asked my brother: "Might I feel
her pulse?"

'I put out a tired, well-rounded wrist from beneath the coverlet.
"Ah!" thought I, as I looked on it, "if only there had been a
sapphire bracelet."[5] I have never before seen a doctor so awkward
about feeling a patient's pulse. His fingers trembled as they felt
my wrist. He measured the heat of my fever, I gauged the pulse of
his heart.--Don't you believe me?'

  [5] Widows are supposed to dress in white only, without ornaments or
  jewellery.

'Very easily,' said I; 'the human heart-beat tells its tale.'

'After I had been taken ill and restored to health several times,
I found that the number of the courtiers who attended my imaginary
evening reception began to dwindle till they were reduced to only one!
And at last in my little world there remained only one doctor and one
patient.

'In these evenings I used to dress myself[6] secretly in a
canary-coloured _sari_; twine about the braided knot into which I did
my hair a garland of white jasmine blossoms; and with a little
mirror in my hand betake myself to my usual seat under the trees.

  [6] See note on p. 38.

'Well! Are you perhaps thinking that the sight of one's own beauty
would soon grow wearisome? Ah no! for I did not see myself with my own
eyes. I was then one and also two. I used to see myself as though I
were the doctor; I gazed, I was charmed, I fell madly in love. But,
in spite of all the caresses I lavished on myself, a sigh would wander
about my heart, moaning like the evening breeze.

'Anyhow, from that time I was never alone. When I walked I watched
with downcast eyes the play of my dainty little toes on the earth,
and wondered what the doctor would have felt had he been there to
see. At mid-day the sky would be filled with the glare of the sun,
without a sound, save now and then the distant cry of a passing kite.
Outside our garden-walls the hawker would pass with his musical
cry of "Bangles for sale, crystal bangles." And I, spreading a
snow-white sheet on the lawn, would lie on it with my head on my arm.
With studied carelessness the other arm would rest lightly on the soft
sheet, and I would imagine to myself that some one had caught sight of
the wonderful pose of my hand, that some one had clasped it in both of
his and imprinted a kiss on its rosy palm, and was slowly walking
away.--What if I ended the story here? How would it do?'

'Not half a bad ending,' I replied thoughtfully. 'It would no doubt
remain a little incomplete, but I could easily spend the rest of the
night putting in the finishing touches.'

'But that would make the story too serious. Where would the laugh come
in? Where would be the skeleton with its grinning teeth?

'So let me go on. As soon as the doctor had got a little practice, he
took a room on the ground-floor of our house for a consulting-chamber.
I used then sometimes to ask him jokingly about medicines and
poisons, and how much of this drug or that would kill a man. The
subject was congenial and he would wax eloquent. These talks
familiarised me with the idea of death; and so love and death were
the only two things that filled my little world. My story is now
nearly ended--there is not much left.'

'Not much of the night is left either,' I muttered.

'After a time I noticed that the doctor had grown strangely
absent-minded, and it seemed as if he were ashamed of something
which he was trying to keep from me. One day he came in, somewhat
smartly dressed, and borrowed my brother's carriage for the evening.

'My curiosity became too much for me, and I went up to my brother for
information. After some talk beside the point, I at last asked him:
"By the way, Dada,[7] where is the doctor going this evening in your
carriage?"

  [7] Elder brother.

'My brother briefly replied: "To his death."

'"Oh, do tell me," I importuned. "Where is he really going?"

'"To be married," he said, a little more explicitly.

'"Oh, indeed!" said I, as I laughed long and loudly.

'I gradually learnt that the bride was an heiress, who would bring the
doctor a large sum of money. But why did he insult me by hiding all
this from me? Had I ever begged and prayed him not to marry, because it
would break my heart? Men are not to be trusted. I have known only
one man in all my life, and in a moment I made this discovery.

'When the doctor came in after his work and was ready to start, I said
to him, rippling with laughter the while: "Well, doctor, so you are
to be married to-night?"

'My gaiety not only made the doctor lose countenance; it thoroughly
irritated him.

'"How is it," I went on, "that there is no illumination, no band of
music?"

'With a sigh he replied: "Is marriage then such a joyful occasion?"

'I burst out into renewed laughter. "No, no," said I, "this will
never do. Who ever heard of a wedding without lights and music?"

'I bothered my brother about it so much that he at once ordered all the
trappings of a gay wedding.

'All the time I kept on gaily talking of the bride, of what would
happen, of what I would do when the bride came home. "And, doctor," I
asked, "will you still go on feeling pulses?" Ha! ha! ha! Though
the inner workings of people's, especially men's, minds are not
visible, still I can take my oath that these words were piercing the
doctor's bosom like deadly darts.

'The marriage was to be celebrated late at night. Before starting,
the doctor and my brother were having a glass of wine together on the
terrace, as was their daily habit. The moon had just risen.

'I went up smiling, and said: "Have you forgotten your wedding,
doctor? It is time to start."

'I must here tell you one little thing. I had meanwhile gone down
to the dispensary and got a little powder, which at a convenient
opportunity I had dropped unobserved into the doctor's glass.

'The doctor, draining his glass at a gulp, in a voice thick with
emotion, and with a look that pierced me to the heart, said: "Then I
must go."

'The music struck up. I went into my room and dressed myself in my
bridal-robes of silk and gold. I took out my jewellery and ornaments
from the safe and put them all on; I put the red mark of wifehood
on the parting in my hair. And then under the tree in the garden I
prepared my bed.

'It was a beautiful night. The gentle south wind was kissing away
the weariness of the world. The scent of jasmine and _bela_ filled the
garden with rejoicing.

'When the sound of the music began to grow fainter and fainter; the
light of the moon to get dimmer and dimmer; the world with its lifelong
associations of home and kin to fade away from my perceptions like
some illusion;--then I closed my eyes, and smiled.

'I fancied that when people came and found me they would see that
smile of mine lingering on my lips like a trace of rose-coloured wine,
that when I thus slowly entered my eternal bridal-chamber I should
carry with me this smile, illuminating my face. But alas for the
bridal-chamber! Alas for the bridal-robes of silk and gold! When I
woke at the sound of a rattling within me, I found three urchins
learning osteology from my skeleton. Where in my bosom my joys and
griefs used to throb, and the petals of youth to open one by one, there
the master with his pointer was busy naming my bones. And as to that
last smile, which I had so carefully rehearsed, did you see any sign of
that?

'Well, well, how did you like the story?'

'It has been delightful,' said I.

At this point the first crow began to caw. 'Are you there?' I asked.
There was no reply.

The morning light entered the room.




THE AUSPICIOUS VISION


Kantichandra was young; yet after his wife's death he sought no second
partner, and gave his mind to the hunting of beasts and birds. His
body was long and slender, hard and agile; his sight keen; his aim
unerring. He dressed like a countryman, and took with him Hira Singh
the wrestler, Chakkanlal, Khan Saheb the musician, Mian Saheb, and
many others. He had no lack of idle followers.

In the month of _Agrahayan_ Kanti had gone out shooting near the swamp
of Nydighi with a few sporting companions. They were in boats, and
an army of servants, in boats also, filled the bathing-_ghats_. The
village women found it well-nigh impossible to bathe or to draw water.
All day long, land and water trembled to the firing of the guns; and
every evening musicians killed the chance of sleep.

One morning as Kanti was seated in his boat cleaning a favourite gun,
he suddenly started at what he thought was the cry of wild duck.
Looking up, he saw a village maiden, coming to the water's edge, with
two white ducklings clasped to her breast. The little stream was
almost stagnant. Many weeds choked the current. The girl put the birds
into the water, and watched them anxiously. Evidently the presence of
the sportsmen was the cause of her care and not the wildness of the
ducks.

The girl's beauty had a rare freshness--as if she had just come
from Vishwakarma's[8] workshop. It was difficult to guess her age.
Her figure was almost a woman's, but her face was so childish that
clearly the world had left no impression there. She seemed not to
know herself that she had reached the threshold of youth.

  [8] The divine craftsman in Hindu mythology.

Kanti's gun-cleaning stopped for a while. He was fascinated. He had
not expected to see such a face in such a spot. And yet its beauty
suited its surroundings better than it would have suited a palace. A
bud is lovelier on the bough than in a golden vase. That day the
blossoming reeds glittered in the autumn dew and morning sun, and
the fresh, simple face set in the midst was like a picture of festival
to Kanti's enchanted mind. Kalidos has forgotten to sing how Siva's
Mountain-Queen herself sometimes has come to the young Ganges, with
just such ducklings in her breast. As he gazed, the maiden started
in terror, and hurriedly took back the ducks into her bosom with a
half-articulate cry of pain. In another moment, she had left the
river-bank and disappeared into the bamboo thicket hard by. Looking
round, Kanti saw one of his men pointing an unloaded gun at the ducks.
He at once went up to him, wrenched away his gun, and bestowed on his
cheek a prodigious slap. The astonished humourist finished his joke
on the floor. Kanti went on cleaning his gun.

But curiosity drove Kanti to the thicket wherein he had seen the girl
disappear. Pushing his way through, he found himself in the yard
of a well-to-do householder. On one side was a row of conical thatched
barns, on the other a clean cow-shed, at the end of which grew a
_zizyph_ bush. Under the bush was seated the girl he had seen that
morning, sobbing over a wounded dove, into whose yellow beak she was
trying to wring a little water from the moist corner of her garment.
A grey cat, its fore-paws on her knee, was looking eagerly at the
bird, and every now and then, when it got too forward, she kept it in
its place by a warning tap on the nose.

This little picture, set in the peaceful mid-day surroundings of the
householder's yard, instantly impressed itself on Kanti's sensitive
heart. The checkered light and shade, flickering beneath the delicate
foliage of the _zizyph_, played on the girl's lap. Not far off a
cow was chewing the cud, and lazily keeping off the flies with slow
movements of its head and tail. The north wind whispered softly in
the rustling bamboo thickets. And she who at dawn on the river-bank had
looked like the Forest Queen, now in the silence of noon showed the
eager pity of the Divine Housewife. Kanti, coming in upon her with
his gun, had a sense of intrusion. He felt like a thief caught
red-handed. He longed to explain that it was not he who had hurt
the dove. As he wondered how he should begin, there came a call of
'Sudha!' from the house. The girl jumped up. 'Sudha!' came the
voice again. She took up her dove, and ran within. 'Sudha,'[9]
thought Kanti, 'what an appropriate name!'

  [9] _Sudha_ means nectar, ambrosia.

Kanti returned to the boat, handed his gun to his men, and went over to
the front door of the house. He found a middle-aged Brahmin, with a
peaceful, clean-shaven face, seated on a bench outside, and reading
a devotional book. Kanti saw in his kindly, thoughtful face something
of the tenderness which shone in the face of the maiden.

Kanti saluted him, and said: 'May I ask for some water, sir? I am
very thirsty.' The elder man welcomed him with eager hospitality, and,
offering him a seat on the bench, went inside and fetched with his own
hands a little brass plate of sugar wafers and a bell-metal vessel
full of water.

After Kanti had eaten and drunk, the Brahmin begged him to introduce
himself. Kanti gave his own name, his father's name, and the address of
his home, and then said in the usual way: 'If I can be of any service,
sir, I shall deem myself fortunate.'

'I require no service, my son,' said Nabin Banerji; 'I have only
one care at present.'

'What is that, sir?' said Kanti.

'It is my daughter, Sudha, who is growing up' (Kanti smiled as he
thought of her babyish face), 'and for whom I have not yet been able
to find a worthy bridegroom. If I could only see her well married,
all my debt to this world would be paid. But there is no suitable
bridegroom here, and I cannot leave my charge of Gopinath here, to
search for a husband elsewhere.'

'If you would see me in my boat, sir, we would have a talk about the
marriage of your daughter.' So saying, Kanti repeated his salute and
went back. He then sent some of his men into the village to inquire,
and in answer heard nothing but praise of the beauty and virtues of
the Brahmin's daughter.

When next day the old man came to the boat on his promised visit,
Kanti bent low in salutation, and begged the hand of his daughter for
himself. The Brahmin was so much overcome by this undreamed-of piece
of good fortune--for Kanti not only belonged to a well-known Brahmin
family, but was also a landed proprietor of wealth and position--that
at first he could hardly utter a word in reply. He thought there must
have been some mistake, and at length mechanically repeated: 'You
desire to marry my daughter?'

'If you will deign to give her to me,' said Kanti.

'You mean Sudha?' he asked again.

'Yes,' was the reply.

'But will you not first see and speak to her----?'

Kanti, pretending he had not seen her already, said: 'Oh, that we
shall do at the moment of the Auspicious Vision.'[10]

  [10] After betrothal the prospective bride and bridegroom are not
  supposed to see each other again till that part of the wedding
  ceremony which is called _the Auspicious Vision_.

In a voice husky with emotion the old man said: 'My Sudha is indeed
a good girl, well skilled in all the household arts. As you are so
generously taking her on trust, may she never cause you a moment's
regret. This is my blessing!'

The brick-built mansion of the Mazumdars had been borrowed for the
wedding ceremony, which was fixed for next _Magh_, as Kanti did not
wish to delay. In due time the bridegroom arrived on his elephant, with
drums and music and with a torchlight procession, and the ceremony
began.

When the bridal couple were covered with the scarlet screen for the
rite of the Auspicious Vision, Kanti looked up at his bride. In that
bashful, downcast face, crowned with the wedding coronet and bedecked
with sandal paste, he could scarcely recognise the village maiden of
his fancy, and in the fulness of his emotion a mist seemed to becloud
his eyes.

At the gathering of women in the bridal chamber, after the wedding
ceremony was over, an old village dame insisted that Kanti himself
should take off his wife's bridal veil. As he did so he started back.
It was not the same girl.

Something rose from within his breast and pierced into his brain. The
light of the lamps seemed to grow dim, and darkness to tarnish the face
of the bride herself.

At first he felt angry with his father-in-law. The old scoundrel
had shown him one girl, and married him to another. But on calmer
reflection he remembered that the old man had not shown him any
daughter at all--that it was all his own fault. He thought it best
not to show his arrant folly to the world, and took his place again
with apparent calmness.

He could swallow the powder; he could not get rid of its taste. He
could not bear the merry-makings of the festive throng. He was in a
blaze of anger with himself as well as with everybody else.

Suddenly he felt the bride, seated by his side, give a little start
and a suppressed scream; a leveret, scampering into the room, had
brushed across her feet. Close upon it followed the girl he had seen
before. She caught up the leveret into her arms, and began to caress
it with an affectionate murmuring. 'Oh, the mad girl!' cried the
women as they made signs to her to leave the room. She heeded them
not, however, but came and unconcernedly sat in front of the wedded
pair, looking into their faces with a childish curiosity. When a
maidservant came and took her by the arm to lead her away, Kanti
hurriedly interposed, saying, 'Let her be.'

'What is your name?' he then went on to ask her.

The girl swayed backwards and forwards but gave no reply. All the women
in the room began to titter.

Kanti put another question: 'Have those ducklings of yours grown up?'

The girl stared at him as unconcernedly as before.

The bewildered Kanti screwed up courage for another effort, and asked
tenderly after the wounded dove, but with no avail. The increasing
laughter in the room betokened an amusing joke.

At last Kanti learned that the girl was deaf and dumb, the companion of
all the animals and birds of the locality. It was but by chance that
she rose the other day when the name of Sudha was called.

Kanti now received a second shock. A black screen lifted from before
his eyes. With a sigh of intense relief, as of escape from calamity,
he looked once more into the face of his bride. Then came the true
Auspicious Vision. The light from his heart and from the smokeless
lamps fell on her gracious face; and he saw it in its true radiance,
knowing that Nabin's blessing would find fulfilment.




THE SUPREME NIGHT


I used to go to the same dame's school with Surabala and play at
marriage with her. When I paid visits to her house, her mother would
pet me, and setting us side by side would say to herself: 'What a
lovely pair!'

I was a child then, but I could understand her meaning well enough. The
idea became rooted in my mind that I had a special right to Surabala
above that of people in general. So it happened that, in the pride of
ownership, at times I punished and tormented her; and she, too, fagged
for me and bore all my punishments without complaint. The village was
wont to praise her beauty; but in the eyes of a young barbarian like
me that beauty had no glory;--I knew only that Surabala had been
born in her father's house solely to bear my yoke, and that therefore
she was the particular object of my neglect.

My father was the land-steward of the Chaudhuris, a family of
_zemindars_. It was his plan, as soon as I had learnt to write a good
hand, to train me in the work of estate management and secure a rent
collectorship for me somewhere. But in my heart I disliked the
proposal. Nilratan of our village had run away to Calcutta, had
learnt English there, and finally became the _Nazir_[11] of the
District Magistrate; _that_ was my life's ideal: I was secretly
determined to be the Head Clerk of the Judge's Court, even if I could
not become the Magistrate's _Nazir_.

  [11] Superintendent of bailiffs.

I saw that my father always treated these court officers with the
greatest respect. I knew from my childhood that they had to be
propitiated with gifts of fish, vegetables, and even money. For this
reason I had given a seat of high honour in my heart to the court
underlings, even to the bailiffs. These are the gods worshipped in our
Bengal,--a modern miniature edition of the 330 millions of deities
of the Hindu pantheon. For gaining material success, people have
more genuine faith in _them_ than in the good Ganesh, the giver of
success; hence the people now offer to these officers everything
that was formerly Ganesh's due.

Fired by the example of Nilratan, I too seized a suitable opportunity
and ran away to Calcutta. There I first put up in the house of a
village acquaintance, and afterwards got some funds from my father for
my education. Thus I carried on my studies regularly.

In addition, I joined political and benevolent societies. I had no
doubt whatever that it was urgently necessary for me to give my life
suddenly for my country. But I knew not how such a hard task could be
carried out. Also no one showed me the way.

But, nevertheless, my enthusiasm did not abate at all. We country lads
had not learnt to sneer at everything like the precocious boys of
Calcutta, and hence our faith was very strong. The 'leaders' of our
associations delivered speeches, and we went begging for subscriptions
from door to door in the hot blaze of noon without breaking our fast;
or we stood by the roadside distributing hand-bills, or arranged the
chairs and benches in the lecture-hall, and, if anybody whispered
a word against our leader, we got ready to fight him. For these things
the city boys used to laugh at us as provincials.

I had come to Calcutta to be a _Nazir_ or a Head Clerk, but I was
preparing to become a Mazzini or a Garibaldi.

At this time Surabala's father and my father laid their heads together
to unite us in marriage. I had come to Calcutta at the age of fifteen;
Surabala was eight years old then. I was now eighteen, and in my
father's opinion I was almost past the age of marriage. But it was
my secret vow to remain unmarried all my life and to die for my
country; so I told my father that I would not marry before I had
finished my education.

In two or three months I learnt that Surabala had been married to a
pleader named Ram Lochan. I was then busy collecting subscriptions for
raising fallen India, and this news did not seem worth my thought.

I had matriculated, and was about to appear at the Intermediate
Examination, when my father died. I was not alone in the world, but
had to maintain my mother and two sisters. I had therefore to leave
college and look out for employment. After a good deal of exertion
I secured the post of second master in the matriculation school of a
small town in the Noakhali District.

I thought, here is just the work for me! By my advice and inspiration I
shall train up every one of my pupils as a general for future India.

I began to work, and then found that the impending examination was a
more pressing affair than the future of India. The headmaster got angry
whenever I talked of anything outside grammar or algebra. And in a few
months my enthusiasm, too, flagged.

I am no genius. In the quiet of the home I may form vast plans; but
when I enter the field of work, I have to bear the yoke of the plough
on my neck like the Indian bullock, get my tail twisted by my master,
break clods all day, patiently and with bowed head, and then at sunset
have to be satisfied if I can get any cud to chew. Such a creature
has not the spirit to prance and caper.

One of the teachers lived in the school-house, to guard against fires.
As I was a bachelor, this work was thrown on me. I lodged in a thatched
shed close to the large cottage in which the school sat.

The school-house stood at some distance from the inhabited portion of
the town, and beside a big tank. Around it were betel-nut, cocoa-nut,
and _madar_ trees, and very near to the school building two large
ancient _nim_ trees grew close together, and cast a cool shade around.

One thing I have forgotten to mention, and indeed I had not so long
considered it worth mentioning. The local Government pleader, Ram
Lochan Ray, lived near our school. I also knew that his wife--my early
playmate, Surabala--lived with him.

I got acquainted with Ram Lochan Babu. I cannot say whether he knew
that I had known Surabala in childhood. I did not think fit to mention
the fact at my first introduction to him. Indeed, I did not clearly
remember that Surabala had been ever linked with my life in any way.

One holiday I paid a visit to Ram Lochan Babu. The subject of our
conversation has gone out of my mind; probably it was the unhappy
condition of present-day India. Not that he was very much concerned
or heart-broken over the matter; but the subject was such that one
could freely pour forth one's sentimental sorrow over it for an hour
or two while puffing at one's _hooka_.

While thus engaged, I heard in a side-room the softest possible jingle
of bracelets, crackle of dress, and footfall; and I felt certain that
two curious eyes were watching me through a small opening of the window.

All at once there flashed upon my memory a pair of eyes,--a pair of
large eyes, beaming with trust, simplicity, and girlhood's love,--black
pupils,--thick dark eyelashes,--a calm fixed gaze. Suddenly some
unseen force squeezed my heart in an iron grip, and it throbbed with
intense pain.

I returned to my house, but the pain clung to me. Whether I read,
wrote, or did any other work, I could not shake that weight off my
heart; a heavy load seemed to be always swinging from my heart-strings.

In the evening, calming myself a little, I began to reflect: 'What
ails me?' From within came the question: 'Where is _your_ Surabala
now?' I replied: 'I gave her up of my free will. Surely I did not
expect her to wait for me for ever.'

But something kept saying: '_Then_ you could have got her merely for
the asking. _Now_ you have not the right to look at her even once,
do what you will. That Surabala of your boyhood may come very close to
you; you may hear the jingle of her bracelets; you may breathe the air
embalmed by the essence of her hair,--but there will always be a wall
between you two.'

I answered: 'Be it so. What is Surabala to me?'

My heart rejoined: 'To-day Surabala is nobody to you. But what might
she not have been to you?'

Ah! that's true. _What_ might she not have been to me? Dearest to me
of all things, closer to me than the world besides, the sharer of all
my life's joys and sorrows,--she might have been. And now, she is so
distant, so much of a stranger, that to look on her is forbidden,
to talk with her is improper, and to think of her is a sin!--while
this Ram Lochan, coming suddenly from nowhere, has muttered a few set
religious texts, and in one swoop has carried off Surabala from the
rest of mankind!

I have not come to preach a new ethical code, or to revolutionise
society; I have no wish to tear asunder domestic ties. I am only
expressing the exact working of my mind, though it may not be
reasonable. I could not by any means banish from my mind the sense
that Surabala, reigning there within shelter of Ram Lochan's home,
was mine far more than his. The thought was, I admit, unreasonable
and improper,--but it was not unnatural.

Thereafter I could not set my mind to any kind of work. At noon when
the boys in my class hummed, when Nature outside simmered in the sun,
when the sweet scent of the _nim_ blossoms entered the room on the
tepid breeze, I then wished,--I know not what I wished for; but this
I can say, that I did not wish to pass all my life in correcting the
grammar exercises of those future hopes of India.

When school was over, I could not bear to live in my large lonely
house; and yet, if any one paid me a visit, it bored me. In the
gloaming as I sat by the tank and listened to the meaningless breeze
sighing through the betel- and cocoa-nut palms, I used to muse that
human society is a web of mistakes; nobody has the sense to do the
right thing at the right time, and when the chance is gone we break
our hearts over vain longings.

I could have married Surabala and lived happily. But I must be a
Garibaldi,--and I ended by becoming the second master of a village
school! And pleader Ram Lochan Ray, who had no special call to be
Surabala's husband,--to whom, before his marriage, Surabala was no
wise different from a hundred other maidens,--has very quietly married
her, and is earning lots of money as Government pleader; when his
dinner is badly cooked he scolds Surabala, and when he is in good
humour he gives her a bangle! He is sleek and fat, tidily dressed,
free from every kind of worry; _he_ never passes his evenings by the
tank gazing at the stars and sighing.

Ram Lochan was called away from our town for a few days by a big case
elsewhere. Surabala in her house was as lonely as I was in my school
building.

I remember it was a Monday. The sky was overcast with clouds from the
morning. It began to drizzle at ten o'clock. At the aspect of the
heavens our headmaster closed the school early. All day the black
detached clouds began to run about in the sky as if making ready for
some grand display. Next day, towards afternoon, the rain descended
in torrents, accompanied by storm. As the night advanced the fury of
wind and water increased. At first the wind was easterly; gradually
it veered, and blew towards the south and south-west.

It was idle to try to sleep on such a night. I remembered that in this
terrible weather Surabala was alone in her house. Our school was much
more strongly built than her bungalow. Often and often did I plan to
invite her to the school-house, while I meant to pass the night alone
by the tank. But I could not summon up courage for it.

When it was half-past one in the morning, the roar of the tidal wave
was suddenly heard,--the sea was rushing on us! I left my room and ran
towards Surabala's house. In the way stood one embankment of our tank,
and as I was wading to it the flood already reached my knees. When I
mounted the bank, a second wave broke on it. The highest part of the
bank was more than seventeen feet above the plain.

As I climbed up the bank, another person reached it from the opposite
side. Who she was, every fibre of my body knew at once, and my whole
soul was thrilled with the consciousness. I had no doubt that she, too,
had recognised me.

On an island some three yards in area stood we two; all else was
covered with water.

It was a time of cataclysm; the stars had been blotted out of the
sky; all the lights of the earth had been darkened; there would have
been no harm if we had held converse _then_. But we could not bring
ourselves to utter a word; neither of us made even a formal inquiry
after the other's health. Only we stood gazing at the darkness. At our
feet swirled the dense, black, wild, roaring torrent of death.

To-day Surabala has come to _my_ side, leaving the whole world. To-day
she has none besides _me_. In our far-off childhood this Surabala
had come from some dark primeval realm of mystery, from a life in
another orb, and stood by my side on this luminous peopled earth; and
to-day, after a wide span of time, she has left that earth, so full
of light and human beings, to stand alone by _my_ side amidst this
terrible desolate gloom of Nature's death-convulsion. The stream of
birth had flung that tender bud before me, and the flood of death had
wafted the same flower, now in full bloom, to _me_ and to none else.
One more wave and we shall be swept away from this extreme point of the
earth, torn from the stalks on which we now sit apart, and made one
in death.

May that wave never come! May Surabala live long and happily, girt
round by husband and children, household and kinsfolk! This one night,
standing on the brink of Nature's destruction, I have tasted eternal
bliss.

The night wore out, the tempest ceased, the flood abated; without a
word spoken, Surabala went back to her house, and I, too, returned to
my shed without having uttered a word.

I reflected: True, I have become no _Nazir_ or Head Clerk, nor a
Garibaldi; I am only the second master of a beggarly school. But one
night had for its brief space beamed upon my whole life's course.

That one night, out of all the days and nights of my allotted span,
has been the supreme glory of my humble existence.




RAJA AND RANI


Bipin Kisore was born 'with a golden spoon in his mouth'; hence he
knew how to squander money twice as well as how to earn it. The natural
result was that he could not live long in the house where he was born.

He was a delicate young man of comely appearance, an adept in music, a
fool in business, and unfit for life's handicap. He rolled along life's
road like the wheel of Jagannath's car. He could not long command
his wonted style of magnificent living.

Luckily, however, Raja Chittaranjan, having got back his property
from the Court of Wards, was intent upon organising an Amateur Theatre
Party. Captivated by the prepossessing looks of Bipin Kisore and his
musical endowments, the Raja gladly 'admitted him of his crew.'

Chittaranjan was a B.A. He was not given to any excesses. Though the
son of a rich man, he used to dine and sleep at appointed hours
and even at appointed places. And he suddenly became enamoured of
Bipin like one unto drink. Often did meals cool and nights grow old
while he listened to Bipin and discussed with him the merits of
operatic compositions. The Dewan remarked that the only blemish in
the otherwise perfect character of his master was his inordinate
fondness for Bipin Kisore.

Rani Basanta Kumari raved at her husband, and said that he was wasting
himself on a luckless baboon. The sooner she could do away with him,
the easier she would feel.

The Raja was much pleased in his heart at this seeming jealousy of
his youthful wife. He smiled, and thought that women-folk know only one
man upon the earth--him whom they love; and never think of other
men's deserts. That there may be many whose merits deserve regard,
is not recorded in the scriptures of women. The only good man and
the only object of a woman's favours is he who has blabbered into her
ears the matrimonial incantations. A little moment behind the usual
hour of her husband's meals is a world of anxiety to her, but she
never cares a brass button if her husband's dependents have a mouthful
or not. This inconsiderate partiality of the softer sex might be
cavilled at, but to Chittaranjan it did not seem unpleasant. Thus, he
would often indulge in hyperbolic laudations of Bipin in his wife's
presence, just to provoke a display of her delightful fulminations.

But what was sport to the 'royal' couple, was death to poor Bipin.
The servants of the house, as is their wont, took their cue from the
Rani's apathetic and wilful neglect of the wretched hanger-on, and
grew more apathetic and wilful still. They contrived to forget to look
after his comforts, to Bipin's infinite chagrin and untold sufferings.

Once the Rani rebuked the servant Puté, and said: 'You are always
shirking work; what do you do all through the day?' 'Pray, madam,
the whole day is taken up in serving Bipin Babu under the Maharaja's
orders,' stammered the poor valet.

The Rani retorted: 'Your Bipin Babu is a great Nawab, eh?' This was
enough for Puté. He took the hint. From the very next day he left
Bipin Babu's orts as they were, and at times forgot to cover the food
for him. With unpractised hands Bipin often scoured his own dishes
and not unfrequently went without meals. But it was not in him to whine
and report to the Raja. It was not in him to lower himself by petty
squabblings with menials. He did not mind it; he took everything in
good part. And thus while the Raja's favours grew, the Rani's disfavour
intensified, and at last knew no bounds.

Now the opera of _Subhadraharan_ was ready after due rehearsal. The
stage was fitted up in the palace court-yard. The Raja acted the part
of 'Krishna,' and Bipin that of 'Arjuna.' Oh, how sweetly he sang!
how beautiful he looked! The audience applauded in transports of joy.

The play over, the Raja came to the Rani and asked her how she liked
it. The Rani replied: 'Indeed, Bipin acted the part of "Arjuna"
gloriously! He does look like the scion of a noble family. His voice is
rare!' The Raja said jocosely: 'And how do I look? Am I not fair?
Have I not a sweet voice?' 'Oh, yours is different case!' added
the Rani, and again fell to dilating on the histrionic abilities of
Bipin Kisore.

The tables were now turned. He who used to praise, now began to
deprecate. The Raja, who was never weary of indulging in high-sounding
panegyrics of Bipin before his consort, now suddenly fell reflecting
that, after all, unthinking people made too much of Bipin's actual
merits. What was extraordinary about his appearance or voice? A
short while before he himself was one of those unthinking men, but in
a sudden and mysterious way he developed symptoms of thoughtfulness!

From the day following, every good arrangement was made for Bipin's
meals. The Rani told the Raja: 'It is undoubtedly wrong to lodge Bipin
Babu with the petty officers of the Raj in the Kachari[12]; for all he
now is, he was once a man of means.' The Raja ejaculated curtly:
'Ha!' and turned the subject. The Rani proposed that there might
be another performance on the occasion of the first-rice ceremony
of the 'royal' weanling. The Raja heard and heard her not.

  [12] _Kachari_, generally anglicised as _cuteberry_: offices and
  courts.

Once on being reprimanded by the Raja for not properly laying his
cloth, the servant Puté replied: 'What can I do? According to the
Rani's behests I have to look after Bipin Babu and wait on him the
livelong day.' This angered the Raja, and he exclaimed, highly
nettled: 'Pshaw! Bipin Babu is a veritable Nawab, I see! Can't he
cleanse his own dishes himself?' The servant, as before, took his
cue, and Bipin lapsed back into his former wretchedness.

The Rani liked Bipin's songs--they were sweet--there was no gainsaying
it. When her husband sat with Bipin to the wonted discourses of sweet
music of an evening, she would listen from behind the screen in an
adjoining room. Not long afterwards, the Raja began again his old habit
of dining and sleeping at regular hours. The music came to an end.
Bipin's evening services were no more needed.

Raja Chittaranjan used to look after his _zemindari_ affairs at noon.
One day he came earlier to the zenana, and found his consort reading
something. On his asking her what she read, the Rani was a little
taken aback, but promptly replied: 'I am conning over a few songs
from Bipin Babu's song-book. We have not had any music since you
tired abruptly of your musical hobby.' Poor woman! it was she who
had herself made no end of efforts to eradicate the hobby from her
husband's mind.

On the morrow the Raja dismissed Bipin--without a thought as to how
and where the poor fellow would get a morsel henceforth!

Nor was this the only matter of regret to Bipin. He had been bound to
the Raja by the dearest and most sincere tie of attachment. He served
him more for affection than for pay. He was fonder of his friend than
of the wages he received. Even after deep cogitation, Bipin could not
ascertain the cause of the Raja's sudden estrangement. ''Tis Fate! all
is Fate!' Bipin said to himself. And then, silently and bravely,
he heaved a deep sigh, picked up his old guitar, put it up in the
case, paid the last two coins in his pocket as a farewell _bakshish_
to Puté, and walked out into the wide wide world where he had not a
soul to call his friend.




THE TRUST PROPERTY


I

Brindaban Kundu came to his father in a rage and said: 'I am off this
moment.'

'Ungrateful wretch!' sneered the father, Jaganath Kundu. 'When you
have paid me back all that I have spent on your food and clothing, it
will be time enough to give yourself these airs.'

Such food and clothing as was customary in Jaganath's household could
not have cost very much. Our _rishis_ of old managed to feed and
clothe themselves on an incredibly small outlay. Jaganath's behaviour
showed that his ideal in these respects was equally high. That he
could not fully live up to it was due partly to the bad influence of
the degenerate society around him, and partly to certain unreasonable
demands of Nature in her attempt to keep body and soul together.

So long as Brindaban was single, things went smoothly enough, but
after his marriage he began to depart from the high and rarefied
standard cherished by his sire. It was clear that the son's ideas
of comfort were moving away from the spiritual to the material, and
imitating the ways of the world. He was unwilling to put up with the
discomforts of heat and cold, thirst and hunger. His minimum of food
and clothing rose apace.

Frequent were the quarrels between the father and the son. At last
Brindaban's wife became seriously ill and a _kabiraj_[13] was called
in. But when the doctor prescribed a costly medicine for his patient,
Jaganath took it as a proof of sheer incompetence, and turned him
out immediately. At first Brindaban besought his father to allow the
treatment to continue; then he quarrelled with him about it, but to
no purpose. When his wife died, he abused his father and called him
a murderer.

  [13] Country doctor, unqualified by any medical training.

'Nonsense!' said the father. 'Don't people die even after swallowing
all kinds of drugs? If costly medicines could save life, how is it
that kings and emperors are not immortal? You don't expect your wife
to die with more pomp and ceremony than did your mother and your
grandmother before her, do you?'

Brindaban might really have derived a great consolation from these
words, had he not been overwhelmed with grief and incapable of
proper thinking. Neither his mother nor his grandmother had taken any
medicine before making their exit from this world, and this was the
time-honoured custom of the family. But, alas, the younger generation
was unwilling to die according to ancient custom. The English had
newly come to the country at the time we speak of. Even in those remote
days, the good old folks were horrified at the unorthodox ways of the
new generation, and sat speechless, trying to draw comfort from
their _hookas_.

Be that as it may, the modern Brindaban said to his old fogy of a
father: 'I am off.'

The father instantly agreed, and wished publicly that, should he ever
give his son one single pice in future, the gods might reckon his act
as shedding the holy blood of cows. Brindaban in his turn similarly
wished that, should he ever accept anything from his father, his act
might be held as bad as matricide.

The people of the village looked upon this small revolution as a
great relief after a long period of monotony. And when Jaganath
disinherited his only son, every one did his best to console him.
All were unanimous in the opinion that to quarrel with a father for
the sake of a wife was possible only in these degenerate days. And
the reason they gave was sound too. 'When your wife dies,' they
said, 'you can find a second one without delay. But when your father
dies, you can't get another to replace him for love or money.'
Their logic no doubt was perfect, but we suspect that the utter
hopelessness of getting another father did not trouble the misguided
son very much. On the contrary, he looked upon it as a mercy.

Nor did separation from Brindaban weigh heavily on the mind of his
father. In the first place, his absence from home reduced the household
expenses. Then, again, the father was freed from a great anxiety. The
fear of being poisoned by his son and heir had always haunted him. When
he ate his scanty fare, he could never banish the thought of poison
from his mind. This fear had abated somewhat after the death of his
daughter-in-law, and, now that the son was gone, it disappeared
altogether.

But there was one tender spot in the old man's heart. Brindaban had
taken away with him his four-year-old son, Gokul Chandra. Now, the
expense of keeping the child was comparatively small, and so Jaganath's
affection for him was without a drawback. Still, when Brindaban took
him away, his grief, sincere as it was, was mingled at first with
calculation as to how much he would save a month by the absence of the
two, how much the sum would come to in the year, and what would be the
capital to bring it in as interest.

But the empty house, without Gokul Chandra in it to make mischief,
became more and more difficult for the old man to live in. There
was no one now to play tricks upon him when he was engaged in his
_puja_,[14] no one to snatch away his food and eat it, no one to
run away with his inkpot, when he was writing up his accounts. His
daily routine of life, now uninterrupted, became an intolerable burden
to him. He bethought him that this unworried peace was endurable
only in the world to come. When he caught sight of the holes made in
his quilt by his grandchild, and the pen-and-ink sketches executed by
the same artist on his rush-mat, his heart was heavy with grief.
Once upon a time he had reproached the boy bitterly because he had torn
his _dhoti_ into pieces within the short space of two years; now
tears stood in Jaganath's eyes as he gazed upon the dirty remnants
lying in the bedroom. He carefully put them away in his safe, and
registered a vow that, should Gokul ever come back again, he should
not be reprimanded even if he destroyed one _dhoti_ a year.

  [14] A ceremonial worship.

But Gokul did not return, and poor Jaganath aged rapidly. His empty
home seemed emptier every day.

No longer could the old man stay peacefully at home. Even in the
middle of the day, when all respectable folks in the village enjoyed
their after-dinner siesta, Jaganath might be seen roaming over the
village, _hooka_ in hand. The boys, at sight of him, would give up
their play, and, retiring in a body to a safe distance, chant verses
composed by a local poet, praising the old gentleman's economical
habits. No one ventured to say his real name, lest he should have to go
without his meal that day[15]--and so people gave him names after their
own fancy. Elderly people called him Jaganash,[16] but the reason why
the younger generation preferred to call him a vampire was hard to
guess. It may be that the bloodless, dried-up skin of the old man
had some physical resemblance to the vampire's.

  [15] It is a superstition current in Bengal that if a man pronounces
  the name of a very miserly individual, he has to go without his meal
  that day.

  [16] Jaganath is the Lord of Festivity, and Jaga_nash_ would mean the
  despoiler of it.


II

One afternoon, when Jaganath was rambling as usual through the village
lanes shaded by mango topes, he saw a boy, apparently a stranger,
assuming the captaincy of the village boys and explaining to them
the scheme of some new prank. Won by the force of his character and
the startling novelty of his ideas, the boys had all sworn allegiance
to him. Unlike the others, he did not run away from the old man as
he approached, but came quite close to him and began to shake his own
_chadar_. The result was that a live lizard sprang out of it on to
the old man's body, ran down his back and off towards the jungle.
Sudden fright made the poor man shiver from head to foot, to the
great amusement of the other boys, who shouted with glee. Before
Jaganath had gone far, cursing and swearing, the _gamcha_ on his
shoulder suddenly disappeared, and the next moment it was seen on
the head of the new boy, transformed into a turban.

The novel attentions of this manikin came as a great relief to
Jaganath. It was long since any boy had taken such freedom with him.
After a good deal of coaxing and many fair promises, he at last
persuaded the boy to come to him, and this was the conversation
which followed:

'What's your name, my boy?'

'Nitai Pal.'

'Where's your home?'

'Won't tell.'

'Who's your father?'

'Won't tell.'

'Why won't you?'

'Because I have run away from home.'

'What made you do it?'

'My father wanted to send me to school.'

It occurred to Jaganath that it would be useless extravagance to send
such a boy to school, and his father must have been an unpractical fool
not to have thought so.

'Well, well,' said Jaganath, 'how would you like to come and stay
with me?'

'Don't mind,' said the boy, and forthwith he installed himself in
Jaganath's house. He felt as little hesitation as though it were
the shadow of a tree by the wayside. And not only that. He began
to proclaim his wishes as regards his food and clothing with such
coolness that you would have thought he had paid his reckoning in full
beforehand; and, when anything went wrong, he did not scruple to
quarrel with the old man. It had been easy enough for Jaganath to get
the better of his own child; but, now, where another man's child was
concerned, he had to acknowledge defeat.


III

The people of the village marvelled when Nitai Pal was unexpectedly
made so much of by Jaganath. They felt sure that the old man's end
was near, and the prospect of his bequeathing all his property to this
unknown brat made their hearts sore. Furious with envy, they determined
to do the boy an injury, but the old man took care of him as though
he was a rib in his breast.

At times, the boy threatened that he would go away, and the old man
used to say to him temptingly: 'I will leave you all the property I
possess.' Young as he was, the boy fully understood the grandeur of
this promise.

The village people then began to make inquiries after the father of the
boy. Their hearts melted with compassion for the agonised parents,
and they declared that the son must be a rascal to cause them so much
suffering. They heaped abuses on his head, but the heat with which
they did it betrayed envy rather than a sense of justice.

One day the old man learned from a wayfarer that one Damodar Pal was
seeking his lost son, and was even now coming towards the village.
Nitai, when he heard this, became very restless and was ready to run
away, leaving his future wealth to take care of itself. Jaganath
reassured him, saying: 'I mean to hide you where nobody can find
you--not even the village people themselves.'

This whetted the curiosity of the boy and he said: 'Oh, where? Do show
me.'

'People will know, if I show you now. Wait till it is night,' said
Jaganath.

The hope of discovering the mysterious hiding-place delighted Nitai. He
planned to himself how, as soon as his father had gone away without
him, he would have a bet with his comrades, and play hide-and-seek.
Nobody would be able to find him. Wouldn't it be fun? His father, too,
would ransack the whole village, and not find him--that would be rare
fun also.

At noon, Jaganath shut the boy up in his house, and disappeared for
some time. When he came home again, Nitai worried him with questions.

No sooner was it dark than Nitai said: 'Grandfather, shall we go now?'

'It isn't night yet,' replied Jaganath.

A little while later the boy exclaimed: 'It is night now, grandfather;
come let's go.'

'The village people haven't gone to bed yet,' whispered Jaganath.

Nitai waited but a moment, and said: 'They have gone to bed now,
grandfather; I am sure they have. Let's start now.'

The night advanced. Sleep began to weigh heavily on the eyelids of
the poor boy, and it was a hard struggle for him to keep awake. At
midnight, Jaganath caught hold of the boy's arm, and left the house,
groping through the dark lanes of the sleeping village. Not a sound
disturbed the stillness, except the occasional howl of a dog, when
all the other dogs far and near would join in chorus, or perhaps the
flapping of a night-bird, scared by the sound of human footsteps at
that unusual hour. Nitai trembled with fear, and held Jaganath fast
by the arm.

Across many a field they went, and at last came to a jungle, where
stood a dilapidated temple without a god in it. 'What, here!'
exclaimed Nitai in a tone of disappointment. It was nothing like what
he had imagined. There was not much mystery about it. Often, since
running away from home, he had passed nights in deserted temples
like this. It was not a bad place for playing hide-and-seek; still
it was quite possible that his comrades might track him there.

From the middle of the floor inside, Jaganath removed a slab of stone,
and an underground room with a lamp burning in it was revealed to the
astonished eyes of the boy. Fear and curiosity assailed his little
heart. Jaganath descended by a ladder and Nitai followed him.

Looking around, the boy saw that there were brass _ghurras_[17] on all
sides of him. In the middle lay spread an _assan_[18], and in front of
it were arranged vermilion, sandal paste, flowers, and other articles
of _puja_. To satisfy his curiosity the boy dipped his hand into some
of the _ghurras_, and drew out their contents. They were rupees and
gold _mohurs_.

  [17] A water-pot holding about three gallons of water.

  [18] A prayer carpet.

Jaganath, addressing the boy, said: 'I told you, Nitai, that I would
give you all my money. I have not got much,--these _ghurras_ are all
that I possess. These I will make over to you to-day.'

The boy jumped with delight. 'All?' he exclaimed; 'you won't take
back a rupee, will you?'

'If I do,' said the old man in solemn tones, 'may my hand be
attacked with leprosy. But there is one condition. If ever my grandson,
Gokul Chandra, or his son, or his grandson, or his great-grandson or
any of his progeny should happen to pass this way, then you must
make over to him, or to them, every rupee and every _mohur_ here.'

The boy thought that the old man was raving. 'Very well,' he replied.

'Then sit on this _assan_,' said Jaganath.

'What for?'

'Because _puja_ will be done to you.'

'But why?' said the boy, taken aback.

'This is the rule.'

The boy squatted on the _assan_ as he was told. Jaganath smeared
his forehead with sandal paste, put a mark of vermilion between his
eyebrows, flung a garland of flowers round his neck, and began to
recite _mantras_.[19]

  [19] Incantations.

To sit there like a god, and hear _mantras_ recited made poor Nitai
feel very uneasy. 'Grandfather,' he whispered.

But Jaganath did not reply, and went on muttering his incantations.

Finally, with great difficulty he dragged each _ghurra_ before the boy
and made him repeat the following vow after him:

'I do solemnly promise that I will make over all this treasure to
Gokul Chandra Kundu, the son of Brindaban Kundu, the grandson of
Jaganath Kundu, or to the son or to the grandson or to the
great-grandson of the said Gokul Chandra Kundu, or to any other
progeny of his who may be the rightful heir.'

The boy repeated this over and over again, until he felt stupefied,
and his tongue began to grow stiff in his mouth. When the ceremony was
over, the air of the cave was laden with the smoke of the earthen lamp
and the breath-poison of the two. The boy felt that the roof of his
mouth had become dry as dust, and his hands and feet were burning. He
was nearly suffocated.

The lamp became dimmer and dimmer, and then went out altogether. In the
total darkness that followed, Nitai could hear the old man climbing up
the ladder. 'Grandfather, where are you going to?' said he, greatly
distressed.

'I am going now,' replied Jaganath; 'you remain here. No one will
be able to find you. Remember the name Gokul Chandra, the son of
Brindaban, and the grandson of Jaganath.'

He then withdrew the ladder. In a stifled, agonised voice the boy
implored: 'I want to go back to father.'

Jaganath replaced the slab. He then knelt down and placed his ear
on the stone. Nitai's voice was heard once more--'Father'--and
then came a sound of some heavy object falling with a bump--and
then--everything was still.

Having thus placed his wealth in the hands of a _yak_,[20] Jaganath
began to cover up the stone with earth. Then he piled broken bricks
and loose mortar over it. On the top of all he planted turfs of
grass and jungle weeds. The night was almost spent, but he could not
tear himself away from the spot. Now and again he placed his ear
to the ground, and tried to listen. It seemed to him that from far
far below--from the abysmal depth of the earth's interior--came a
wailing. It seemed to him that the night-sky was flooded with that
one sound, that the sleeping humanity of all the world was awake, and
was sitting on its beds, trying to listen.

  [20] _Yak_ or _Yaksa_ is a supernatural being described in Sanskrit
  mythology and poetry. In Bengal, _Yak_ has come to mean a ghostly
  custodian of treasure, under such circumstances as in this story.

The old man in his frenzy kept on heaping earth higher and higher. He
wanted somehow to stifle that sound, but still he fancied he could hear
'Father.'

He struck the spot with all his might and said: 'Be quiet--people
might hear you.' But still he imagined he heard 'Father.'

The sun lighted up the eastern horizon. Jaganath then left the temple,
and came into the open fields.

There, too, somebody called out 'Father.' Startled at the sound, he
turned back and saw his son at his heels.

'Father,' said Brindaban, 'I hear my boy is hiding himself in your
house. I must have him back.'

With eyes dilated and distorted mouth, the old man leaned forward and
exclaimed: 'Your boy?'

'Yes, my boy Gokul. He is Nitai Pal now, and I myself go by the name
of Damodar Pal. Your _fame_ has spread so widely in the neighbourhood,
that we were obliged to cover up our origin, lest people should have
refused to pronounce our names.'

Slowly the old man lifted both his arms above his head. His fingers
began to twitch convulsively, as though he was trying to catch hold of
some imaginary object in the air. He then fell on the ground.

When he came to his senses again, he dragged his son towards the ruined
temple. When they were both inside it, he said: 'Do you hear any
wailing sound?'

'No, I don't,' said Brindaban.

'Just listen very carefully. Do you hear anybody calling out
"Father"?'

'No.'

This seemed to relieve him greatly.

From that day forward, he used to go about asking people: 'Do you hear
any wailing sound?' They laughed at the raving dotard.

About four years later, Jaganath lay on his death-bed. When the
light of this world was gradually fading away from his eyes, and his
breathing became more and more difficult, he suddenly sat up in a
state of delirium. Throwing both his hands in the air he seemed to
grope about for something, muttering: 'Nitai, who has removed my
ladder?'

Unable to find the ladder to climb out of his terrible dungeon, where
there was no light to see and no air to breathe, he fell on his bed
once more, and disappeared into that region where no one has ever been
found out in the world's eternal game of hide-and-seek.[21]

  [21] The incidents described in this story, now happily a thing of
  the past, were by no means rare in Bengal at one time. Our author,
  however, slightly departs from the current accounts. Such criminally
  superstitious practices were resorted to by miserly persons under the
  idea that they themselves would re-acquire the treasure in a future
  state of existence. 'When you see me in a future birth passing this
  way, you must make over all this treasure to me. Guard it till then
  and stir not,'--was the usual promise exacted from the victim before
  he became _yak_. Many were the 'true' stories we heard in childhood of
  people becoming suddenly rich by coming across ghostly custodians of
  wealth belonging to them in a past birth.




THE RIDDLE SOLVED


I

Krishna Gopal Sircar, zemindar of Jhikrakota, made over his estates to
his eldest son, and retired to Kasi, as befits a good Hindu, to spend
the evening of his life in religious devotion. All the poor and the
destitute of the neighbourhood were in tears at the parting. Every one
declared that such piety and benevolence were rare in these degenerate
days.

His son, Bipin Bihari, was a young man well educated after the modern
fashion, and had taken the degree of Bachelor of Arts. He sported a
pair of spectacles, wore a beard, and seldom mixed with others. His
private life was unsullied. He did not smoke, and never touched
cards. He was a man of stern disposition, though he looked soft and
pliable. This trait of his character soon came home to his tenantry
in diverse ways. Unlike his father, he would on no account allow the
remission of one single pice out of the rents justly due to him.
In no circumstances would he grant any tenant one single day's grace
in paying up.

On taking over the management of the property, Bipin Bihari discovered
that his father had allowed a large number of Brahmins to hold land
entirely rent-free, and a larger number at rents much below the
prevailing rates. His father was incapable of resisting the importunate
solicitation of others--such was the weakness of his character.

Bipin Bihari said this could never be. He could not abandon the
income of half his property--and he reasoned with himself thus:
_Firstly_, the persons who were in actual enjoyment of the concessions
and getting fat at his expense were a lot of worthless people, and
wholly undeserving of charity. Charity bestowed on such objects only
encouraged idleness. _Secondly_, living nowadays had become much
costlier than in the days of his ancestors. Wants had increased apace.
For a gentleman to keep up his position had become four times as
expensive as in days past. So he could not afford to scatter gifts
right and left as his father had done. On the contrary, it was his
bounden duty to call back as many of them as he possibly could.

So Bipin Bihari lost no time in carrying into effect what he conceived
to be his duty. He was a man of strict principles.

What had gone out of his grasp, returned to him little by little. Only
a very small portion of his father's grants did he allow to remain
undisturbed, and he took good care to arrange that even those should
not be deemed permanent.

The wails of the tenants reached Krishna Gopal at Benares through the
post. Some even made a journey to that place to represent their
grievances to him in person. Krishna Gopal wrote to his son intimating
his displeasure. Bipin Bihari replied, pointing out that the times
had changed. In former days, he said, the _zemindar_ was compensated
for the gifts he made by the many customary presents he received from
his tenantry. Recent statutes had made all such impositions illegal.
The _zemindar_ had now to rest content with just the stipulated
rent, and nothing more. 'Unless,' he continued, 'we keep a strict
watch over the payment of our just dues, what will be left to us?
Since the tenants won't give us anything extra now, how can we allow
them concessions? Our relations must henceforth be strictly commercial.
We shall be ruined if we go on making gifts and endowments, and the
preservation of our property and the keeping up of our position will be
rendered very difficult.'

Krishna Gopal became uneasy at finding that times should have changed
so much. 'Well, well,' he murmured to himself, 'the younger
generation knows best, I suppose. Our old-fashioned methods won't
do now. If I interfere, my son might refuse to manage the property,
and insist on my going back. No, thank you--I would rather not. I
prefer to devote the few days that are left me to the service of my
God.'


II

So things went on. Bipin Bihari put his affairs in order after much
litigation in the Courts, and by less constitutional methods outside.
Most of the tenants submitted to his will out of fear. Only a fellow
called Asimuddin, son of Mirza Bibi, remained refractory.

Bipin's displeasure was keenest against this man. He could quite
understand his father having granted rent-free lands to Brahmins, but
why this Mohammedan should be holding so much land, some free and
some at rents lower than the prevailing rates, was a riddle to him.
And what was he? The son of a low Mohammedan widow, giving himself
airs and defying the whole world, simply because he had learnt to read
and write a little at the village school. To Bipin it was intolerable.

He made inquiries of his clerks about Asimuddin's holdings. All that
they could tell him was that Babu Krishna Gopal himself had made
these grants to the family many years back, but they had no idea
as to what his motive might have been. They imagined, however, that
perhaps the widow won the compassion of the kind-hearted _zemindar_, by
representing to him her woe and misery.

To Bipin these favours seemed to be utterly undeserved. He had not
seen the pitiable condition of these people in days gone by. Their
comparative ease at the present day and their arrogance drove him to
the conclusion that they had impudently swindled his tender-hearted
father out of a part of his lawful income.

Asimuddin was a stiff-necked sort of a fellow, too. He vowed that he
would lay down his life sooner than give up an inch of his land. Then
came open hostilities.

The poor old widow tried her best to pacify her son. 'It is no good
fighting with the _zemindar_,' she would often say to him. 'His
kindness has kept us alive so long; let us depend upon him still,
though he may curtail his favours. Surrender to him part of the lands
as he desires.'

'Oh, mother!' protested Asimuddin. 'What do you know of these
matters, pray?'

One by one, Asimuddin lost the cases instituted against him. The more
he lost, the more his obstinacy increased. For the sake of his all,
he staked all that was his.

One afternoon, Mirza Bibi collected some fruits and vegetables from
her little garden, and unknown to her son went and sought an interview
with Bipin Babu. She looked at him with a tenderness maternal in its
intensity, and spoke: 'May Allah bless you, my son. Do not destroy
Asim--it wouldn't be right of you. To your charge I commit him.
Take him as though he were one whom it is your duty to support--as
though he were a ne'er-do-well younger brother of yours. Vast is
your wealth--don't grudge him a small particle of it, my son.'

This assumption of familiarity on the part of the garrulous old woman
annoyed Bipin not a little. 'What do you know of these things, my good
woman?' he condescended to say. 'If you have any representations
to make, send your son to me.'

Being assured for the second time that she knew nothing about these
affairs, Mirza Bibi returned home, wiping her eyes with her apron all
the way, and offering her silent prayers to Allah.


III

The litigation dragged its weary length from the Criminal to the
Civil Courts, and thence to the High Court, where at last Asimuddin
met with a partial success. Eighteen months passed in this way. But he
was a ruined man now--plunged in debts up to his very ears. His
creditors took this opportunity to execute the decrees they had
obtained against him. A date was fixed for putting up to auction every
stick and stone that he had left.

It was Monday. The village market had assembled by the side of a tiny
river, now swollen by the rains. Buying and selling were going on,
partly on the bank and partly in the boats moored there. The hubbub was
great. Among the commodities for sale jack-fruits preponderated, it
being the month of _Asadh_. _Hilsa_ fish were seen in large quantities
also. The sky was cloudy. Many of the stall-holders, apprehending a
downpour, had stretched a piece of cloth overhead, across bamboo
poles put up for the purpose.

Asimuddin had come too--but he had not a copper with him. No
shopkeepers allowed him credit nowadays. He therefore had brought a
brass _thali_[22] and a _dao_[23] with him. These he would pawn,
and then buy what he needed.

  [22] _Thali_: plate.

  [23] _Dao_: knife.

Towards evening, Bipin Babu was out for a walk attended by two or
three retainers armed with _lathis_.[24] Attracted by the noise, he
directed his steps towards the market. On his arrival, he stopped
awhile before the stall of Dwari, the oilman, and made kindly inquiries
about his business. All on a sudden, Asimuddin raised his _dao_ and
ran towards Bipin Babu, roaring like a tiger. The market people
caught hold of him half-way, and quickly disarmed him. He was forthwith
given in custody to the police. Business in the market then went on as
usual.

  [24] _Lathis_: stick.

We cannot say that Bipin Babu was not inwardly pleased at this
incident. It is intolerable that the creature we are hunting down
should turn and show fight. 'The _badmash_,' Bipin chuckled; 'I
have got him at last.'

The ladies of Bipin Babu's house, when they heard the news, exclaimed
with horror: 'Oh, the ruffian! What a mercy they seized him in time!'
They found consolation in the prospect of the man being punished as
he richly deserved.

In another part of the village the same evening the widow's humble
cottage, devoid of bread and bereft of her son, became darker than
death. Others dismissed the incident of the afternoon from their minds,
sat down to their meals, retired to bed and went to sleep, but to
the widow the event loomed larger than anything else in this wide
world. But, alas, who was there to combat it? Only a bundle of wearied
bones and a helpless mother's heart trembling with fear.


IV

Three days have passed in the meanwhile. To-morrow the case would come
up for trial before a Deputy Magistrate. Bipin Babu would have to be
examined as a witness. Never before this did a _zemindar_ of Jhikrakota
appear in the witness-box, but Bipin did not mind.

The next day at the appointed hour, Bipin Babu arrived at the Court
in a palanquin in great state. He wore a turban on his head, and a
watch-chain dangled on his breast. The Deputy Magistrate invited him
to a seat on the daïs, beside his own. The Court-room was crowded to
suffocation. So great a sensation had not been witnessed in this Court
for many years.

When the time for the case to be called drew near, a _chaprassi_ came
and whispered something in Bipin Babu's ear. He got up very agitated
and walked out, begging the Deputy Magistrate to excuse him for a few
minutes.

Outside he saw his old father a little way off, standing under a
_banian_ tree, barefooted and wrapped in a piece of _namabali_.[25]
A string of beads was in his hand. His slender form shone with a gentle
lustre, and tranquil compassion seemed to radiate from his forehead.

  [25] A garment with the name of Krishna printed over it.

Bipin, hampered by his close-fitting trousers and his flowing
_chapkan_, touched his father's feet with his forehead. As he did
this his turban came off and kissed his nose, and his watch, popping
out of his pocket, swung to and fro in the air. Bipin hurriedly
straightened his turban, and begged his father to come to his pleader's
house close by.

'No, thank you,' Krishna Gopal replied, 'I will tell you here what
I have got to say.'

A curious crowd had gathered by this time. Bipin's attendants pushed
them back.

Then Krishna Gopal said: 'You must do what you can to get Asim
acquitted, and restore him the lands that you have taken away from
him.'

'Is it for this, father,' said Bipin, very much surprised, 'that you
have come all the way from Benares? Would you tell me why you have made
these people the objects of your special favour?'

'What would you gain by knowing it, my boy?'

But Bipin persisted. 'It is only this, father,' he went on; 'I have
revoked many a grant because I thought the tenants were not deserving.
There were many Brahmins among them, but of them you never said a
word. Why are you so keen about these Mohammedans now? After all that
has happened, if I drop this case against Asim, and give him back his
lands, what shall I say to people?'

Krishna Gopal kept silence for some moments. Then, passing the beads
through his shaky fingers with rapidity, he spoke with a tremulous
voice: 'Should it be necessary to explain your conduct to people,
you may tell them that Asimuddin is my son--and your brother.'

'What?' exclaimed Bipin in painful surprise. 'From a Musalman's
womb?'

'Even so, my son,' was the calm reply.

Bipin stood there for some time in mute astonishment. Then he found
words to say: 'Come home, father; we will talk about it afterwards.'

'No, my son,' replied the old man, 'having once relinquished the
world to serve my God, I cannot go home again. I return hence. Now I
leave you to do what your sense of duty may suggest.' He then blessed
his son, and, checking his tears with difficulty, walked off with
tottering steps.

Bipin was dumbfounded, not knowing what to say nor what to do. 'So,
such was the piety of the older generation,' he said to himself. He
reflected with pride how much better he was than his father in point
of education and morality. This was the result, he concluded, of not
having a principle to guide one's actions.

Returning to the Court, he saw Asimuddin outside between two
constables, awaiting his trial. He looked emaciated and worn out.
His lips were pale and dry, and his eyes unnaturally bright. A dirty
piece of cloth worn to shreds covered him. 'This my brother!' Bipin
shuddered at the thought.

The Deputy Magistrate and Bipin were friends, and the case ended in a
fiasco. In a few days Asimuddin was restored to his former condition.
Why all this happened, he could not understand. The village people were
greatly surprised also.

However, the news of Krishna Gopal's arrival just before the trial
soon got abroad. People began to exchange meaning glances. The
pleaders in their shrewdness guessed the whole affair. One of them,
Ram Taran Babu, was beholden to Krishna Gopal for his education and
his start in life. Somehow or other he had always suspected that
the virtue and piety of his benefactor were shams. Now he was fully
convinced that, if a searching inquiry were made, all 'pious' men
might be found out. 'Let them tell their beads as much as they
like,' he thought with glee, 'everybody in this world is just as
bad as myself. The only difference between a good and a bad man is
that the good practise dissimulation while the bad don't.' The
revelation that Krishna Gopal's far-famed piety, benevolence, and
magnanimity were nothing but a cloak of hypocrisy, settled a difficulty
that had oppressed Ram Taran Babu for many years. By what process
of reasoning, we do not know, the burden of gratitude was greatly
lifted off his mind. It was a vast relief to him!




THE ELDER SISTER


I

Having described at length the misdeeds of an unfortunate woman's
wicked, tyrannical husband, Tara, the woman's neighbour in the village,
very shortly declared her verdict: 'Fire be to such a husband's
mouth.'

At this Joygopal Babu's wife felt much hurt; it did not become
womankind to wish, in any circumstances whatever, a worse species
of fire than that of a cigar in a husband's mouth.

When, therefore, she mildly disapproved the verdict, hard-hearted Tara
cried with redoubled vehemence: ''Twere better to be a widow seven
births over than the wife of such a husband,' and saying this she
broke up the meeting and left.

Sasi said within herself: 'I can't imagine any offence in a husband
that could so harden the heart against him.' Even as she turned
the matter over in her mind, all the tenderness of her loving soul
gushed forth towards her own husband now abroad. Throwing herself with
outstretched arms on that part of the bed whereon her husband was wont
to lie, she kissed the empty pillow, caught the smell of her husband's
head, and, shutting the door, brought out from a wooden box an old and
almost faded photograph with some letters in his handwriting, and sat
gazing upon them. Thus she passed the hushed noontide alone in her
room, musing of old memories and shedding tears of sadness.

It was no new yoke this between Sasikala and Joygopal. They had been
married at an early age and had children. Their long companionship
had made the days go by in an easy, commonplace sort of way. On
neither side had there been any symptoms of excessive passion. They
had lived together nearly sixteen years without a break, when her
husband was suddenly called away from home on business, and then a
great impulse of love awoke in Sasi's soul. As separation strained
the tie, love's knot grew tighter, and the passion, whose existence
Sasi had not felt, now made her throb with pain.

So it happened that after so many long years, and at such an age,
and being the mother of children, Sasi, on this spring noon, in her
lonely chamber, lying on the bed of separation, began to dream the
sweet dream of a bride in her budding youth. That love of which
hitherto she had been unconscious suddenly aroused her with its
murmuring music. She wandered a long way up the stream, and saw many a
golden mansion and many a grove on either bank; but no foothold could
she find now amid the vanished hopes of happiness. She began to
say to herself that, when next she met her husband, life should not
be insipid nor should the spring come in vain. How very often, in idle
disputation or some petty quarrel, had she teased her husband! With
all the singleness of a penitent heart she vowed that she would never
show impatience again, never oppose her husband's wishes, bear all
his commands, and with a tender heart submit to whatever he wished of
good or ill; for the husband was all-in-all, the husband was the
dearest object of love, the husband was divine.

Sasikala was the only and much-petted daughter of her parents. For this
reason, though he had only a small property of his own, Joygopal had no
anxieties about the future. His father-in-law had enough to support
them in a village with royal state.

And then in his old age a son was born untimely to Sasikala's
father. To tell the truth, Sasi was very sore in her mind at this
unlooked-for, improper, and unjust action of her parents; nor was
Joygopal particularly pleased.

The parents' love centred in this son of their advanced years, and
when the newly arrived, diminutive, sleepy brother-in-law seized with
his two weak tiny fists all the hopes and expectations of Joygopal,
Joygopal found a place in a tea-garden in Assam.

His friends urged him to look for employment hard-by, but whether out
of a general feeling of resentment, or knowing the chances of rapid
rise in a tea-garden, Joygopal would not pay heed to anybody. He sent
his wife and children to his father-in-law's, and left for Assam. It
was the first separation between husband and wife in their married life.

This incident made Sasikala very angry with her baby brother. The
soreness which may not pass the lips is felt the more keenly within.
When the little fellow sucked and slept at his ease, his big sister
found a hundred reasons, such as the rice is cold, the boys are too
late for school, to worry herself and others, day and night, with her
petulant humours.

But in a short time the child's mother died. Before her death, she
committed her infant son to her daughter's care.

Then did the motherless child easily conquer his sister's heart. With
loud whoops he would fling himself upon her, and with right good-will
try to get her mouth, nose, eyes within his own tiny mouth; he would
seize her hair within his little fists and refuse to give it up;
awaking before the dawn, he would roll over to her side and thrill her
with his soft touch, and babble like a noisy brook; later on, he
would call her _jiji_ and _jijima_, and in hours of work and rest, by
doing forbidden things, eating forbidden food, going to forbidden
places, would set up a regular tyranny over her; then Sasi could
resist no longer. She surrendered herself completely to this wayward
little tyrant. Since the child had no mother, his influence over her
became the greater.


II

The child was named Nilmani. When he was two years old his father
fell seriously ill. A letter reached Joygopal asking him to come as
quickly as possible. When after much trouble he got leave and arrived,
Kaliprasanna's last hour had come.

Before he died Kaliprasanna entrusted Joygopal with the charge of his
son, and left a quarter of his estate to his daughter.

So Joygopal gave up his appointment, and came home to look after his
property.

After a long time husband and wife met again. When a material body
breaks it may be put together again. But when two human beings are
divided, after a long separation, they never re-unite at the same
place, and to the same time; for the mind is a living thing, and moment
by moment it grows and changes.

In Sasi reunion stirred a new emotion. The numbness of age-long habit
in their old marriage was entirely removed by the longing born of
separation, and she seemed to win her husband much more closely than
before. Had she not vowed in her mind that whatever days might come,
and how long soever they might be, she would never let the brightness
of this glowing love for her husband be dimmed.

Of this reunion, however, Joygopal felt differently. When they were
constantly together before he had been bound to his wife by his
interests and idiosyncrasies. His wife was then a living truth in his
life, and there would have been a great rent in the web of his daily
habit if she were left out. Consequently Joygopal found himself in
deep waters at first when he went abroad. But in time this breach in
habit was patched up by a new habit.

And this was not all. Formerly his days went by in the most indolent
and careless fashion. For the last two years, the stimulus of bettering
his condition had stirred so powerfully in his breast that he had
nothing else in his thoughts. As compared with the intensity of this
new passion, his old life seemed like an unsubstantial shadow. The
greatest changes in a woman's nature are wrought by love; in a man's,
by ambition.

Joygopal, when he returned after two years, found his wife not quite
the same as of old. To her life his infant brother-in-law had added a
new breadth. This part of her life was wholly unfamiliar to him--here
he had no communion with his wife. His wife tried hard to share her
love for the child with him, but it cannot be said that she succeeded.
Sasi would come with the child in her arms, and hold him before her
husband with a smiling face--Nilmani would clasp Sasi's neck, and hide
his face on her shoulder, and admit no obligation of kindred. Sasi
wished that her little brother might show Joygopal all the arts he had
learnt to capture a man's mind. But Joygopal was not very keen about
it. How could the child show any enthusiasm? Joygopal could not at all
understand what there was in the heavy-pated, grave-faced, dusky
child that so much love should be wasted on him.

Women quickly understand the ways of love. Sasi at once understood that
Joygopal did not care for Nilmani. Henceforth she used to screen her
brother with the greatest care--to keep him away from the unloving,
repelling look of her husband. Thus the child came to be the treasure
of her secret care, the object of her isolated love.

Joygopal was greatly annoyed when Nilmani cried; so Sasi would quickly
press the child to her breast, and with her whole heart and soul try
to soothe him. And when Nilmani's cry happened to disturb Joygopal's
sleep at night, and Joygopal with an expression of displeasure, and
in a tortured spirit, growled at the child, Sasi felt humbled and
fluttered like a guilty thing. Then she would take up the child in
her lap, retire to a distance, and in a voice of pleading love, with
such endearments as 'my gold, my treasure, my jewel,' lull him to
sleep.

Children will fall out for a hundred things. Formerly in such cases,
Sasi would punish her children, and side with her brother, for he was
motherless. Now the law changed with the judge. Nilmani had often to
bear heavy punishment without fault and without inquiry. This wrong
went like a dagger to Sasi's heart; so she would take her punished
brother into her room, and with sweets and toys, and by caressing and
kissing him, solace as much as she could his stricken heart.

Thus the more Sasi loved Nilmani, the more Joygopal was annoyed with
him. On the other hand, the more Joygopal showed his contempt for
Nilmani, the more would Sasi bathe the child with the nectar of her
love.

And when the fellow Joygopal behaved harshly to his wife, Sasi would
minister to him silently, meekly, and with loving-kindness. But
inwardly they hurt each other, moment by moment, about Nilmani.

The hidden clash of a silent conflict like this is far harder to bear
than an open quarrel.


III

Nilmani's head was the largest part of him. It seemed as if the Creator
had blown through a slender stick a big bubble at its top. The doctors
feared sometimes that the child might be as frail and as quickly
evanescent as a bubble. For a long time he could neither speak nor
walk. Looking at his sad grave face, you might think that his parents
had unburdened all the sad weight of their advanced years upon the head
of this little child.

With his sister's care and nursing, Nilmani passed the period of
danger, and arrived at his sixth year.

In the month of Kartik, on the _bhaiphoto_[26] day, Sasi had dressed
Nilmani up as a little Babu, in coat and _chadar_ and red-bordered
_dhoti_, and was giving him the 'brother's mark,' when her outspoken
neighbour Tara came in and, for one reason or another, began a quarrel.

  [26] Lit. the 'brother's mark.' A beautiful and touching ceremony in
  which a Hindu sister makes a mark of sandalwood paste on the forehead
  of her brother and utters a formula, 'putting the barrier in Yama's
  doorway' (figurative for wishing long life). On these occasions, the
  sisters entertain their brothers and make them presents of clothes,
  etc.

''Tis no use,' cried she, 'giving the "brother's mark" with so
much show and ruining the brother in secret.'

At this Sasi was thunderstruck with astonishment, rage, and pain. Tara
repeated the rumour that Sasi and her husband had conspired together
to put the minor Nilmani's property up for sale for arrears of rent,
and to purchase it in the name of her husband's cousin. When Sasi heard
this, she uttered a curse that those who could spread such a foul
lie might be stricken with leprosy in the mouth. And then she went
weeping to her husband, and told him of the gossip. Joygopal said:
'Nobody can be trusted in these days. Upen is my aunt's son, and I
felt quite safe in leaving him in charge of the property. He could not
have allowed the _taluk_ Hasilpur to fall into arrears and purchase it
himself in secret, if I had had the least inkling about it.'

'Won't you sue then?' asked Sasi in astonishment.

'Sue one's cousin!' said Joygopal. 'Besides, it would be useless,
a simple waste of money.'

It was Sasi's supreme duty to trust her husband's word, but Sasi could
not. At last her happy home, the domesticity of her love seemed
hateful to her. That home life which had once seemed her supreme
refuge was nothing more than a cruel snare of self-interest, which had
surrounded them, brother and sister, on all sides. She was a woman,
single-handed, and she knew not how she could save the helpless
Nilmani. The more she thought, the more her heart filled with terror,
loathing, and an infinite love for her imperilled little brother. She
thought that, if she only knew how, she would appear before the _Lat
Saheb_,[27] nay, write to the Maharani herself, to save her brother's
property. The Maharani would surely not allow Nilmani's _taluk_[28]
of Hasilpur, with an income of seven hundred and fifty-eight rupees a
year, to be sold.

  [27] The Viceroy.

  [28] Land.

When Sasi was thus thinking of bringing her husband's cousin to book
by appealing to the Maharani herself, Nilmani was suddenly seized with
fever and convulsions.

Joygopal called in the village doctor. When Sasi asked for a better
doctor, Joygopal said: 'Why, Matilal isn't a bad sort.'

Sasi fell at his feet, and charged him with an oath on her own head;
whereupon Joygopal said: 'Well, I shall send for the doctor from
town.'

Sasi lay with Nilmani in her lap, nor would Nilmani let her out of his
sight for a minute; he clung to her lest by some pretence she should
escape; even while he slept he would not loosen his hold of her dress.

Thus the whole day passed, and Joygopal came after nightfall to say
that the doctor was not at home; he had gone to see a patient at a
distance. He added that he himself had to leave that very day on
account of a lawsuit, and that he had told Matilal, who would regularly
call to see the patient.

At night Nilmani wandered in his sleep. As soon as the morning dawned,
Sasi, without the least scruple, took a boat with her sick brother, and
went straight to the doctor's house. The doctor was at home--he had not
left the town. He quickly found lodgings for her, and having installed
her under the care of an elderly widow, undertook the treatment of
the boy.

The next day Joygopal arrived. Blazing with fury, he ordered his wife
to return home with him at once.

'Even if you cut me to pieces, I won't return,' replied his wife.
'You all want to kill my Nilmani, who has no father, no mother, none
other than me, but I will save him.'

'Then you remain here, and don't come back to my house,' cried
Joygopal indignantly.

Sasi at length fired up. '_Your_ house! Why, 'tis my brother's!'

'All right, we'll see,' said Joygopal. The neighbours made a great
stir over this incident. 'If you want to quarrel with your husband,'
said Tara, 'do so at home. What is the good of leaving your house?
After all, Joygopal is your husband.'

By spending all the money she had with her, and selling her ornaments,
Sasi saved her brother from the jaws of death. Then she heard that the
big property which they had in Dwarigram, where their dwelling-house
stood, the income of which was more than Rs. 1500 a year, had been
transferred by Joygopal into his own name with the help of the
Jemindar. And now the whole property belonged to them, not to her
brother.

When he had recovered from his illness, Nilmani would cry plaintively:
'Let us go home, sister.' His heart was pining for his nephews and
nieces, his companions. So he repeatedly said: 'Let us go home,
sister, to that old house of ours.' At this Sasi wept. Where was
their home?

But it was no good crying. Her brother had no one else besides herself
in the world. Sasi thought of this, wiped her tears, and, entering the
Zenana of the Deputy Magistrate, Tarini Babu, appealed to his wife.
The Deputy Magistrate knew Joygopal. That a woman should forsake her
home, and engage in a dispute with her husband regarding matters of
property, greatly incensed him against Sasi. However, Tarini Babu
kept Sasi diverted, and instantly wrote to Joygopal. Joygopal put
his wife and brother-in-law into a boat by force, and brought them home.

Husband and wife, after a second separation, met again for the second
time! The decree of Prajapati![29]

  [29] The Hindu god of marriage.

Having got back his old companions after a long absence, Nilmani was
perfectly happy. Seeing his unsuspecting joy, Sasi felt as if her heart
would break.


IV

The Magistrate was touring in the Mofussil during the cold weather and
pitched his tent within the village to shoot. The Saheb met Nilmani on
the village _maidan_. The other boys gave him a wide berth, varying
Chanakya's couplet a little, and adding the Saheb to the list of 'the
clawed, the toothed, and the horned beasts.' But grave-natured Nilmani
in imperturbable curiosity serenely gazed at the Saheb.

The Saheb was amused and came up and asked in Bengali: 'You read at
the _pathsala_?'

The boy silently nodded. 'What _pustaks_[30] do you read?' asked the
Saheb.

  [30] A literary word for books. The colloquial will be _boi_.

As Nilmani did not understand the word _pustak_, he silently fixed his
gaze on the Magistrate's face. Nilmani told his sister the story of
his meeting the Magistrate with great enthusiasm.

At noon, Joygopal, dressed in trousers, _chapkan_,[31] and
_pagri_,[32] went to pay his salams to the Saheb. A crowd of suitors,
_chaprasies_,[33] and constables stood about him. Fearing the
heat, the Saheb had seated himself at a court-table outside the tent,
in the open shade, and placing Joygopal in a chair, questioned him
about the state of the village. Having taken the seat of honour in
open view of the community, Joygopal swelled inwardly, and thought
it would be a good thing if any of the Chakrabartis or Nandis came
and saw him there.

  [31] A _chapkan_ is a long coat.

  [32] Turban.

  [33] Servants.

At this moment, a woman, closely veiled, and accompanied by Nilmani,
came straight up to the Magistrate. She said: 'Saheb, into your
hands I resign my helpless brother. Save him.' The Saheb, seeing the
large-headed, solemn boy, whose acquaintance he had already made, and
thinking that the woman must be of a respectable family, at once stood
up and said: 'Please enter the tent.'

The woman said: 'What I have to say I will say here.'

Joygopal writhed and turned pale. The curious villagers thought it
capital fun, and pressed closer. But the moment the Saheb lifted his
cane they scampered off.

Holding her brother by the hand, Sasi narrated the history of the
orphan from the beginning. As Joygopal tried to interrupt now and
then, the Magistrate thundered with a flushed face, '_Chup rao_,' and
with the tip of his cane motioned to Joygopal to leave the chair and
stand up.

Joygopal, inwardly raging against Sasi, stood speechless. Nilmani
nestled up close to his sister, and listened awe-struck.

When Sasi had finished her story, the Magistrate put a few questions to
Joygopal, and on hearing his answers, kept silence for a long while,
and then addressed Sasi thus: 'My good woman, though this matter
may not come up before me, still rest assured I will do all that is
needful about it. You can return home with your brother without the
least misgiving.'

Sasi said: 'Saheb, so long as he does not get back his own home, I
dare not take him there. Unless you keep Nilmani with you, none else
will be able to save him.'

'And what would you do?' queried the Saheb.

'I will retire to my husband's house,' said Sasi; 'there is nothing
to fear for me.'

The Saheb smiled a little, and, as there was nothing else to do, agreed
to take charge of this lean, dusty, grave, sedate, gentle Bengali boy
whose neck was ringed with amulets.

When Sasi was about to take her leave, the boy clutched her dress.
'Don't be frightened, _baba_,--come,' said the Saheb. With tears
streaming behind her veil, Sasi said: 'Do go, my brother, my darling
brother--you will meet your sister again!'

Saying this she embraced him and stroked his head and back, and
releasing her dress, hastily withdrew; and just then the Saheb put his
left arm round him. The child wailed out: 'Sister, oh, my sister!'
Sasi turned round at once, and with outstretched arm made a sign of
speechless solace, and with a bursting heart withdrew.

Again in that old, ever-familiar house husband and wife met. The decree
of Prajapati!

But this union did not last long. For soon after the villagers learnt
one morning that Sasi had died of cholera in the night, and had been
instantly cremated.

None uttered a word about it. Only neighbour Tara would sometimes
be on the point of bursting out, but people would shut up her mouth,
saying, 'Hush!'

At parting, Sasi gave her word to her brother they would meet again.
Where that word was kept none can tell.




SUBHA


When the girl was given the name of Subhashini,[34] who could have
guessed that she would prove dumb? Her two elder sisters were
Sukeshini[35] and Suhasini,[36] and for the sake of uniformity her
father named his youngest girl Subhashini. She was called Subha for
short.

  [34] Sweetly speaking.

  [35] Lovely-locked.

  [36] Sweetly smiling.

Her two elder sisters had been married with the usual cost and
difficulty, and now the youngest daughter lay like a silent weight
upon the heart of her parents. All the world seemed to think that,
because she did not speak, therefore she did not feel; it discussed
her future and its own anxiety freely in her presence. She had
understood from her earliest childhood that God had sent her like a
curse to her father's house, so she withdrew herself from ordinary
people, and tried to live apart. If only they would all forget her she
felt she could endure it. But who can forget pain? Night and day
her parents' minds were aching on her account. Especially her mother
looked upon her as a deformity in herself. To a mother a daughter is
a more closely intimate part of herself than a son can be; and a
fault in her is a source of personal shame. Banikantha, Subha's
father, loved her rather better than his other daughters; her mother
regarded her with aversion as a stain upon her own body.

If Subha lacked speech, she did not lack a pair of large dark eyes,
shaded with long lashes; and her lips trembled like a leaf in response
to any thought that rose in her mind.

When we express our thought in words, the medium is not found easily.
There must be a process of translation, which is often inexact, and
then we fall into error. But black eyes need no translating; the mind
itself throws a shadow upon them. In them thought opens or shuts,
shines forth, or goes out in darkness, hangs steadfast like the
setting moon, or, like the swift and restless lightning, illumines all
quarters of the sky. They who from birth have had no other speech
than the trembling of their lips learn a language of the eyes, endless
in expression, deep as the sea, clear as the heavens, wherein play
dawn and sunset, light and shadow. The dumb have a lonely grandeur
like Nature's own. Wherefore the other children almost dreaded Subha,
and never played with her. She was silent and companionless as noontide.

The hamlet where she lived was Chandipur. Its river, small for a river
of Bengal, kept to its narrow bounds like a daughter of the middle
class. This busy streak of water never overflowed its banks, but went
about its duties as though it were a member of every family in the
villages beside it. On either side were houses and banks shaded with
trees. So stepping from her queenly throne, the river-goddess became
a garden deity of each home; and forgetful of herself, performed her
task of endless benediction with swift and cheerful foot.

Banikantha's house looked upon the stream. Every hut and stack in
the place could be seen by the passing boatmen. I know not if amid
these signs of worldly wealth any one noticed the little girl who,
when her work was done, stole away to the waterside, and sat there.
But here Nature fulfilled her want of speech, and spoke for her.
The murmur of the brook, the voice of the village folk, the songs
of the boatmen, the crying of the birds and rustle of trees mingled,
and were one with the trembling of her heart. They became one vast
wave of sound, which beat upon her restless soul. This murmur and
movement of Nature were the dumb girl's language; that speech of
the dark eyes, which the long lashes shaded, was the language of
the world about her. From the trees, where the cicalas chirped, to
the quiet stars there was nothing but signs and gestures, weeping and
sighing. And in the deep mid-noon, when the boatmen and fisherfolk
had gone to their dinner, when the villagers slept, and birds were
still, when the ferry-boats were idle, when the great busy world paused
in its toil, and became suddenly a lonely, awful giant, then beneath
the vast impressive heavens there were only dumb Nature and a dumb
girl, sitting very silent--one under the spreading sunlight, the
other where a small tree cast its shadow.

But Subha was not altogether without friends. In the stall were two
cows, Sarbbashi and Panguli. They had never heard their names from
her lips, but they knew her footfall. Though she had no words, she
murmured lovingly and they understood her gentle murmuring better
than all speech. When she fondled them or scolded or coaxed them,
they understood her better than men could do. Subha would come to the
shed, and throw her arms round Sarbbashi's neck; she would rub her
cheek against her friend's, and Panguli would turn her great kind
eyes and lick her face. The girl paid them three regular visits every
day, and others that were irregular. Whenever she heard any words
that hurt her, she would come to these dumb friends out of due time.
It was as though they guessed her anguish of spirit from her quiet look
of sadness. Coming close to her, they would rub their horns softly
against her arms, and in dumb, puzzled fashion try to comfort her.
Besides these two, there were goats and a kitten; but Subha had not
the same equality of friendship with them, though they showed the
same attachment. Every time it got a chance, night or day, the kitten
would jump into her lap, and settle down to slumber, and show its
appreciation of an aid to sleep as Subha drew her soft fingers over its
neck and back.

Subha had a comrade also among the higher animals, and it is hard to
say what were the girl's relations with him, for he could speak, and
his gift of speech left them without any common language. He was the
youngest boy of the Gosains, Pratap by name, an idle fellow. After
long effort, his parents had abandoned the hope that he would ever
make his living. Now losels have this advantage, that, though their
own folk disapprove of them, they are generally popular with every
one else. Having no work to chain them, they become public property.
Just as every town needs an open space where all may breathe, so a
village needs two or three gentlemen of leisure, who can give time
to all; so that, if we are lazy and want a companion, one is to hand.

Pratap's chief ambition was to catch fish. He managed to waste a lot
of time this way, and might be seen almost any afternoon so employed.
It was thus most often that he met Subha. Whatever he was about, he
liked a companion; and, when one is catching fish, a silent companion
is best of all. Pratap respected Subha for her taciturnity, and, as
every one called her Subha, he showed his affection by calling her
Su. Subha used to sit beneath a tamarind, and Pratap, a little distance
off, would cast his line. Pratap took with him a small allowance
of betel, and Subha prepared it for him. And I think that, sitting
and gazing a long while, she desired ardently to bring some great help
to Pratap, to be of real aid, to prove by any means that she was
not a useless burden to the world. But there was nothing to do. Then
she turned to the Creator in prayer for some rare power, that by an
astonishing miracle she might startle Pratap into exclaiming: 'My! I
never dreamt our Su could have done this!'

Only think! if Subha had been a water nymph, she might have risen
slowly from the river, bringing the gem of a snake's crown to the
landing-place. Then Pratap, leaving his paltry fishing, might dive
into the lower world, and see there, on a golden bed in a palace of
silver, whom else but dumb little Su, Banikantha's child? Yes, our
Su, the only daughter of the king of that shining city of jewels!
But that might not be, it was impossible. Not that anything is
really impossible, but Su had been born, not into the royal house of
Patalpur,[37] but into Banikantha's family, and she knew no means of
astonishing the Gosains' boy.

  [37] The Lower World.

Gradually she grew up. Gradually she began to find herself. A new
inexpressible consciousness like a tide from the central places of
the sea, when the moon is full, swept through her. She saw herself,
questioned herself, but no answer came that she could understand.

Once upon a time, late on a night of full moon, she slowly opened
her door, and peeped out timidly. Nature, herself at full moon, like
lonely Subha, was looking down on the sleeping earth. Her strong young
life beat within her; joy and sadness filled her being to its brim;
she reached the limits even of her own illimitable loneliness, nay,
passed beyond them. Her heart was heavy, and she could not speak!
At the skirts of this silent, troubled Mother there stood a silent
troubled girl.

The thought of her marriage filled her parents with an anxious care.
People blamed them, and even talked of making them outcasts. Banikantha
was well off; they had fish-curry twice daily; and consequently he
did not lack enemies. Then the women interfered, and Bani went away
for a few days. Presently he returned, and said: 'We must go to
Calcutta.'

They got ready to go to this strange country. Subha's heart was heavy
with tears, like a mist-wrapt dawn. With a vague fear that had been
gathering for days, she dogged her father and mother like a dumb
animal. With her large eyes wide open, she scanned their faces as
though she wished to learn something. But not a word did they
vouchsafe. One afternoon in the midst of all this, as Pratap was
fishing, he laughed: 'So then, Su, they have caught your bridegroom,
and you are going to be married! Mind you don't forget me altogether!'
Then he turned his mind again to his fish. As a stricken doe looks
in the hunter's face, asking in silent agony: 'What have I done to
you?' so Subha looked at Pratap. That day she sat no longer beneath
her tree. Banikantha, having finished his nap, was smoking in his
bedroom when Subha dropped down at his feet and burst out weeping
as she gazed towards him. Banikantha tried to comfort her, and his
cheek grew wet with tears.

It was settled that on the morrow they should go to Calcutta. Subha
went to the cow-shed to bid farewell to her childhood's comrades.
She fed them with her hand; she clasped their necks; she looked into
their faces, and tears fell fast from the eyes which spoke for her.
That night was the tenth of the moon. Subha left her room, and flung
herself down on her grassy couch beside her dear river. It was as
if she threw her arms about Earth, her strong, silent mother, and tried
to say: 'Do not let me leave you, mother. Put your arms about me, as
I have put mine about you, and hold me fast.'

One day in a house in Calcutta, Subha's mother dressed her up with
great care. She imprisoned her hair, knotting it up in laces, she
hung her about with ornaments, and did her best to kill her natural
beauty, Subha's eyes filled with tears. Her mother, fearing they
would grow swollen with weeping, scolded her harshly, but the tears
disregarded the scolding. The bridegroom came with a friend to inspect
the bride. Her parents were dizzy with anxiety and fear when they saw
the god arrive to select the beast for his sacrifice. Behind the
stage, the mother called her instructions aloud, and increased her
daughter's weeping twofold, before she sent her into the examiner's
presence. The great man, after scanning her a long time, observed:
'Not so bad.'

He took special note of her tears, and thought she must have a tender
heart. He put it to her credit in the account, arguing that the heart,
which to-day was distressed at leaving her parents, would presently
prove a useful possession. Like the oyster's pearls, the child's tears
only increased her value, and he made no other comment.

The almanac was consulted, and the marriage took place on an auspicious
day. Having delivered over their dumb girl into another's hands,
Subha's parents returned home. Thank God! Their caste in this and
their safety in the next world were assured! The bridegroom's work
lay in the west, and shortly after the marriage he took his wife
thither.

In less than ten days every one knew that the bride was dumb! At least,
if any one did not, it was not her fault, for she deceived no one. Her
eyes told them everything, though no one understood her. She looked
on every hand; she found no speech; she missed the faces, familiar
from birth, of those who had understood a dumb girl's language. In her
silent heart there sounded an endless, voiceless weeping, which only
the Searcher of Hearts could hear.

Using both eyes and ears _this_ time, her lord made another careful
examination, using his ears this time as well as his eyes, and married
a second wife who could speak.




THE POSTMASTER


The postmaster first took up his duties in the village of Ulapur.
Though the village was a small one, there was an indigo factory near
by, and the proprietor, an Englishman, had managed to get a post office
established.

Our postmaster belonged to Calcutta. He felt like a fish out of water
in this remote village. His office and living-room were in a dark
thatched shed, not far from a green, slimy pond, surrounded on all
sides by a dense growth.

The men employed in the indigo factory had no leisure; moreover, they
were hardly desirable companions for decent folk. Nor is a Calcutta
boy an adept in the art of associating with others. Among strangers
he appears either proud or ill at ease. At any rate, the postmaster
had but little company; nor had he much to do.

At times he tried his hand at writing a verse or two. That the movement
of the leaves and the clouds of the sky were enough to fill life with
joy--such were the sentiments to which he sought to give expression.
But God knows that the poor fellow would have felt it as the gift of a
new life, if some genie of the _Arabian Nights_ had in one night swept
away the trees, leaves and all, and replaced them with a macadamised
road, hiding the clouds from view with rows of tall houses.

The postmaster's salary was small. He had to cook his own meals, which
he used to share with Ratan, an orphan girl of the village, who did
odd jobs for him.

When in the evening the smoke began to curl up from the village
cow-sheds,[38] and the cicalas chirped in every bush; when the faquirs
of the Baül sect sang their shrill songs in their daily meeting-place,
when any poet, who had attempted to watch the movement of the leaves in
the dense bamboo thickets, would have felt a ghostly shiver run
down his back, the postmaster would light his little lamp, and call
out 'Ratan.'

  [38] Smoky fires are lit in the cow-sheds to drive off mosquitoes.

Ratan would sit outside waiting for this call, and, instead of coming
in at once, would reply: 'Did you call me, sir?'

'What are you doing?' the postmaster would ask.

'I must be going to light the kitchen fire,' would be the answer.

And the postmaster would say: 'Oh, let the kitchen fire be for awhile;
light me my pipe first.'

At last Ratan would enter, with puffed-out cheeks, vigorously blowing
into a flame a live coal to light the tobacco. This would give the
postmaster an opportunity of conversing. 'Well, Ratan,' perhaps
he would begin, 'do you remember anything of your mother?' That was a
fertile subject. Ratan partly remembered, and partly didn't. Her
father had been fonder of her than her mother; him she recollected more
vividly. He used to come home in the evening after his work, and
one or two evenings stood out more clearly than others, like pictures
in her memory. Ratan would squat on the floor near the postmaster's
feet, as memories crowded in upon her. She called to mind a little
brother that she had--and how on some bygone cloudy day she had
played at fishing with him on the edge of the pond, with a twig for a
make-believe fishing-rod. Such little incidents would drive out
greater events from her mind. Thus, as they talked, it would often
get very late, and the postmaster would feel too lazy to do any
cooking at all. Ratan would then hastily light the fire, and toast
some unleavened bread, which, with the cold remnants of the morning
meal, was enough for their supper.

On some evenings, seated at his desk in the corner of the big empty
shed, the postmaster too would call up memories of his own home, of
his mother and his sister, of those for whom in his exile his heart
was sad,--memories which were always haunting him, but which he could
not talk about with the men of the factory, though he found himself
naturally recalling them aloud in the presence of the simple little
girl. And so it came about that the girl would allude to his people
as mother, brother, and sister,[39] as if she had known them all her
life. In fact, she had a complete picture of each one of them painted
in her little heart.

  [39] Family servants call the master and mistress father and mother
  and the children elder brothers and sisters.

One noon, during a break in the rains, there was a cool soft breeze
blowing; the smell of the damp grass and leaves in the hot sun felt
like the warm breathing of the tired earth on one's body. A persistent
bird went on all the afternoon repeating the burden of its one
complaint in Nature's audience chamber.

The postmaster had nothing to do. The shimmer of the freshly washed
leaves, and the banked-up remnants of the retreating rain-clouds were
sights to see; and the postmaster was watching them, and thinking
to himself: 'Oh, if only some kindred soul were near--just one loving
human being whom I could hold near my heart!' This was exactly, he
went on to think, what that bird was trying to say, and it was the
same feeling which the murmuring leaves were striving to express. But
no one knows, or would believe, that such an idea might also take
possession of an ill-paid village postmaster in the deep, silent
mid-day interval of his work.

The postmaster sighed, and called out 'Ratan.' Ratan was then
sprawling beneath the guava-tree, busily engaged in eating unripe
guavas. At the voice of her master, she ran up breathlessly, saying:
'Were you calling me, Dada?'[40] 'I was thinking,' said the
postmaster, 'of teaching you to read,' and then for the rest of
the afternoon he taught her the alphabet.

  [40] Dada = elder brother.

Thus, in a very short time, Ratan had got as far as the double
consonants.

It seemed as though the showers of the season would never end. Canals,
ditches, and hollows were all overflowing with water. Day and night
the patter of rain was heard, and the croaking of frogs. The village
roads became impassable, and marketing had to be done in punts.

One heavily clouded morning, the postmaster's little pupil had been
long waiting outside the door for her call, but, not hearing it as
usual, she took up her dog-eared book, and slowly entered the room.
She found her master stretched out on his pallet, and, thinking he
was resting, she was about to retire on tip-toe, when she suddenly
heard her name--'Ratan!' She turned at once and asked: 'Were you
sleeping, Dada?' The postmaster in a plaintive voice said: 'I am not
well. Feel my head; is it very hot?'

In the loneliness of his exile, and in the gloom of the rains, his
ailing body needed a little tender nursing. He longed to remember
the touch on the forehead of soft hands with tinkling bracelets,
to imagine the presence of loving womanhood, the nearness of mother
and sister. And the exile was not disappointed. Ratan ceased to be a
little girl. She at once stepped into the post of mother, called in the
village doctor, gave the patient his pills at the proper intervals,
sat up all night by his pillow, cooked his gruel for him, and every
now and then asked: 'Are you feeling a little better, Dada?'

It was some time before the postmaster, with weakened body, was able to
leave his sick-bed. 'No more of this,' said he with decision. 'I
must get a transfer.' He at once wrote off to Calcutta an application
for a transfer, on the ground of the unhealthiness of the place.

Relieved from her duties as nurse, Ratan again took up her old place
outside the door. But she no longer heard the same old call. She would
sometimes peep inside furtively to find the postmaster sitting on
his chair, or stretched on his pallet, and staring absent-mindedly
into the air. While Ratan was awaiting her call, the postmaster was
awaiting a reply to his application. The girl read her old lessons over
and over again--her great fear was lest, when the call came, she might
be found wanting in the double consonants. At last, after a week, the
call did come one evening. With an overflowing heart Ratan rushed
into the room with her--'Were you calling me, Dada?'

The postmaster said: 'I am going away to-morrow, Ratan.'

'Where are you going, Dada?'

'I am going home.'

'When will you come back?'

'I am not coming back.'

Ratan asked no other question. The postmaster, of his own accord, went
on to tell her that his application for a transfer had been rejected,
so he had resigned his post, and was going home.

For a long time neither of them spoke another word. The lamp went
on dimly burning, and from a leak in one corner of the thatch water
dripped steadily into an earthen vessel on the floor beneath it.

After a while Ratan rose, and went off to the kitchen to prepare the
meal; but she was not so quick about it as on other days. Many new
things to think of had entered her little brain. When the postmaster
had finished his supper, the girl suddenly asked him: 'Dada, will
you take me to your home?'

The postmaster laughed. 'What an idea!' said he; but he did not think
it necessary to explain to the girl wherein lay the absurdity.

That whole night, in her waking and in her dreams, the postmaster's
laughing reply haunted her--'What an idea!'

On getting up in the morning, the postmaster found his bath ready. He
had stuck to his Calcutta habit of bathing in water drawn and kept
in pitchers, instead of taking a plunge in the river as was the custom
of the village. For some reason or other, the girl could not ask
him about the time of his departure, so she had fetched the water
from the river long before sunrise, that it should be ready as early
as he might want it. After the bath came a call for Ratan. She entered
noiselessly, and looked silently into her master's face for orders.
The master said: 'You need not be anxious about my going away, Ratan;
I shall tell my successor to look after you.' These words were kindly
meant, no doubt: but inscrutable are the ways of a woman's heart!

Ratan had borne many a scolding from her master without complaint, but
these kind words she could not bear. She burst out weeping, and said:
'No, no, you need not tell anybody anything at all about me; I don't
want to stay on here.'

The postmaster was dumbfounded. He had never seen Ratan like this
before.

The new incumbent duly arrived, and the postmaster, having given over
charge, prepared to depart. Just before starting he called Ratan,
and said: 'Here is something for you; I hope it will keep you for
some little time.' He brought out from his pocket the whole of his
month's salary, retaining only a trifle for his travelling expenses.
Then Ratan fell at his feet and cried: 'Oh, Dada, I pray you, don't
give me anything, don't in any way trouble about me,' and then she
ran away out of sight.

The postmaster heaved a sigh, took up his carpet bag, put his
umbrella over his shoulder, and, accompanied by a man carrying his
many-coloured tin trunk, he slowly made for the boat.

When he got in and the boat was under way, and the rain-swollen river,
like a stream of tears welling up from the earth, swirled and sobbed at
her bows, then he felt a sort of pain at heart; the grief-stricken
face of a village girl seemed to represent for him the great unspoken
pervading grief of Mother Earth herself. At one time he had an impulse
to go back, and bring away along with him that lonesome waif, forsaken
of the world. But the wind had just filled the sails, the boat had
got well into the middle of the turbulent current, and already the
village was left behind, and its outlying burning-ground came in sight.

So the traveller, borne on the breast of the swift-flowing river,
consoled himself with philosophical reflections on the numberless
meetings and partings going on in the world--on death, the great
parting, from which none returns.

But Ratan had no philosophy. She was wandering about the post office
in a flood of tears. It may be that she had still a lurking hope in
some corner of her heart that her Dada would return, and that is why
she could not tear herself away. Alas for the foolish human heart!




THE RIVER STAIRS


If you wish to hear of days gone by, sit on this step of mine, and lend
your ears to the murmur of the rippling water.

The month of _Ashwin_ (September) was about to begin. The river was in
full flood. Only four of my steps peeped above the surface. The water
had crept up to the low-lying parts of the bank, where the _kachu_
plant grew dense beneath the branches of the mango grove. At that
bend of the river, three old brick-heaps towered above the water around
them. The fishing-boats, moored to the trunks of the _bâbla_ trees on
the bank, rocked on the heaving flow-tide at dawn. The path of tall
grasses on the sandbank had caught the newly risen sun; they had just
begun to flower, and were not yet in full bloom.

The little boats puffed out their tiny sails on the sunlit river. The
Brahmin priest had come to bathe with his ritual vessels. The women
arrived in twos and threes to draw water. I knew this was the time of
Kusum's coming to the bathing-stairs.

But that morning I missed her. Bhuban and Swarno mourned at the
_ghât_.[41] They said that their friend had been led away to her
husband's house, which was a place far away from the river, with
strange people, strange houses, and strange roads.

  [41] Bathing-place.

In time she almost faded out of my mind. A year passed. The women at
the _ghât_ now rarely talked of Kusum. But one evening I was startled
by the touch of the long familiar feet. Ah, yes, but those feet were
now without anklets, they had lost their old music.

Kusum had become a widow. They said that her husband had worked in
some far-off place, and that she had met him only once or twice. A
letter brought her the news of his death. A widow at eight years old,
she had rubbed out the wife's red mark from her forehead, stripped
off her bangles, and come back to her old home by the Ganges. But she
found few of her old playmates there. Of them, Bhuban, Swarno, and
Amala were married, and gone away; only Sarat remained, and she too,
they said, would be wed in December next.

As the Ganges rapidly grows to fulness with the coming of the rains,
even so did Kusum day by day grow to the fulness of beauty and youth.
But her dull-coloured robe, her pensive face, and quiet manners drew
a veil over her youth, and hid it from men's eyes as in a mist. Ten
years slipped away, and none seemed to have noticed that Kusum had
grown up.

One morning such as this, at the end of a far-off September, a tall,
young, fair-skinned Sanyasi, coming I know not whence, took shelter
in the Shiva temple, in front of me. His arrival was noised abroad in
the village. The women left their pitchers behind, and crowded into
the temple to bow to the holy man.

The crowd increased day by day. The Sanyasi's fame rapidly spread among
the womenkind. One day he would recite the _Bhágbat_, another day he
would expound the _Gita_, or hold forth upon a holy book in the temple.
Some sought him for counsel, some for spells, some for medicines.

So months passed away. In April, at the time of the solar eclipse,
vast crowds came here to bathe in the Ganges. A fair was held under
the _bâbla_ tree. Many of the pilgrims went to visit the Sanyasi, and
among them were a party of women from the village where Kusum had been
married.

It was morning. The Sanyasi was counting his beads on my steps, when
all of a sudden one of the women pilgrims nudged another, and said:
'Why! He is our Kusum's husband!' Another parted her veil a little
in the middle with two fingers and cried out: 'Oh dear me! So it is!
He is the younger son of the Chattergu family of our village!' Said a
third, who made little parade of her veil: 'Ah! he has got exactly
the same brow, nose, and eyes!' Yet another woman, without turning
to the Sanyasi, stirred the water with her pitcher, and sighed:
'Alas! That young man is no more; he will not come back. Bad luck
to Kusum!'

But, objected one, 'He had not such a big beard'; and another,
'He was not so thin'; or 'He was most probably not so tall.' That
settled the question for the time, and the matter spread no further.

One evening, as the full moon arose, Kusum came and sat upon my last
step above the water, and cast her shadow upon me.

There was no other at the _ghât_ just then. The crickets were
chirping about me. The din of brass gongs and bells had ceased in
the temple--the last wave of sound grew fainter and fainter, until it
merged like the shade of a sound in the dim groves of the farther
bank. On the dark water of the Ganges lay a line of glistening
moonlight. On the bank above, in bush and hedge, under the porch of
the temple, in the base of ruined houses, by the side of the tank,
in the palm grove, gathered shadows of fantastic shape. The bats
swung from the _chhatim_ boughs. Near the houses the loud clamour
of the jackals rose and sank into silence.

Slowly the Sanyasi came out of the temple. Descending a few steps of
the _ghât_ he saw a woman sitting alone, and was about to go back,
when suddenly Kusum raised her head, and looked behind her. The veil
slipped away from her. The moonlight fell upon her face, as she looked
up.

The owl flew away hooting over their heads. Starting at the sound,
Kusum came to herself and put the veil back on her head. Then she bowed
low at the Sanyasi's feet.

He gave her blessing and asked: 'Who are you?'

She replied: 'I am called Kusum.'

No other word was spoken that night. Kusum went slowly back to her
house which was hard by. But the Sanyasi remained sitting on my steps
for long hours that night. At last when the moon passed from the east
to the west, and the Sanyasi's shadow, shifting from behind, fell in
front of him, he rose up and entered the temple.

Henceforth I saw Kusum come daily to bow at his feet. When he expounded
the holy books, she stood in a corner listening to him. After finishing
his morning service, he used to call her to himself and speak on
religion. She could not have understood it all; but, listening
attentively in silence, she tried to understand it. As he directed
her, so she acted implicitly. She daily served at the temple--ever
alert in the god's worship--gathering flowers for the _puja_, and
drawing water from the Ganges to wash the temple floor.

The winter was drawing to its close. We had cold winds. But now and
then in the evening the warm spring breeze would blow unexpectedly from
the south; the sky would lose its chilly aspect; pipes would sound,
and music be heard in the village after a long silence. The boatmen
would set their boats drifting down the current, stop rowing, and begin
to sing the songs of Krishna. This was the season.

Just then I began to miss Kusum. For some time she had given up
visiting the temple, the _ghât_, or the Sanyasi.

What happened next I do not know, but after a while the two met
together on my steps one evening.

With downcast looks, Kusum asked: 'Master, did you send for me?'

'Yes, why do I not see you? Why have you grown neglectful of late in
serving the gods?'

She kept silent.

'Tell me your thoughts without reserve.'

Half averting her face, she replied: 'I am a sinner, Master, and hence
I have failed in the worship.'

The Sanyasi said: 'Kusum, I know there is unrest in your heart.'

She gave a slight start, and, drawing the end of her sári over her
face, she sat down on the step at the Sanyasi's feet, and wept.

He moved a little away, and said: 'Tell me what you have in your
heart, and I shall show you the way to peace.'

She replied in a tone of unshaken faith, stopping now and then for
words: 'If you bid me, I must speak out. But, then, I cannot explain
it clearly. You, Master, must have guessed it all. I adored one as a
god, I worshipped him, and the bliss of that devotion filled my heart
to fulness. But one night I dreamt that the lord of my heart was
sitting in a garden somewhere, clasping my right hand in his left,
and whispering to me of love. The whole scene did not appear to me at
all strange. The dream vanished, but its hold on me remained. Next day
when I beheld him he appeared in another light than before. That
dream-picture continued to haunt my mind. I fled far from him in
fear, and the picture clung to me. Thenceforth my heart has known
no peace,--all has grown dark within me!'

While she was wiping her tears and telling this tale, I felt that the
Sanyasi was firmly pressing my stone surface with his right foot.

Her speech done, the Sanyasi said:

'You must tell me whom you saw in your dream.'

With folded hands, she entreated: 'I cannot.'

He insisted: 'You must tell me who he was.'

Wringing her hands she asked: 'Must I tell it?'

He replied: 'Yes, you must.'

Then crying, 'You are he, Master!' she fell on her face on my stony
bosom, and sobbed.

When she came to herself, and sat up, the Sanyasi said slowly: 'I am
leaving this place to-night that you may not see me again. Know that
I am a Sanyasi, not belonging to this world. _You_ must forget me.'

Kusum replied in a low voice: 'It will be so, Master.'

The Sanyasi said: 'I take my leave.'

Without a word more Kusum bowed to him, and placed the dust of his feet
on her head. He left the place.

The moon set; the night grew dark. I heard a splash in the water. The
wind raved in the darkness, as if it wanted to blow out all the stars
of the sky.




THE CASTAWAY


Towards evening the storm was at its height. From the terrific downpour
of rain, the crash of thunder, and the repeated flashes of lightning,
you might think that a battle of the gods and demons was raging in
the skies. Black clouds waved like the Flags of Doom. The Ganges was
lashed into a fury, and the trees of the gardens on either bank swayed
from side to side with sighs and groans.

In a closed room of one of the riverside houses at Chandernagore, a
husband and his wife were seated on a bed spread on the floor, intently
discussing. An earthen lamp burned beside them.

The husband, Sharat, was saying: 'I wish you would stay on a few days
more; you would then be able to return home quite strong again.'

The wife, Kiran, was saying: 'I have quite recovered already. It will
not, cannot possibly, do me any harm to go home now.'

Every married person will at once understand that the conversation
was not quite so brief as I have reported it. The matter was not
difficult, but the arguments for and against did not advance it
towards a solution. Like a rudderless boat, the discussion kept
turning round and round the same point; and at last it threatened to
be overwhelmed in a flood of tears.

Sharat said: 'The doctor thinks you should stop here a few days
longer.'

Kiran replied: 'Your doctor knows everything!'

'Well,' said Sharat, 'you know that just now all sorts of illness
are abroad. You would do well to stop here a month or two more.'

'And at this moment I suppose every one in this place is perfectly
well!'

What had happened was this: Kiran was a universal favourite with her
family and neighbours, so that, when she fell seriously ill, they
were all anxious. The village wiseacres thought it shameless for her
husband to make so much fuss about a mere wife and even to suggest a
change of air, and asked if Sharat supposed that no woman had ever
been ill before, or whether he had found out that the folk of the
place to which he meant to take her were immortal. Did he imagine
that the writ of Fate did not run there? But Sharat and his mother
turned a deaf ear to them, thinking that the little life of their
darling was of greater importance than the united wisdom of a village.
People are wont to reason thus when danger threatens their loved ones.
So Sharat went to Chandernagore, and Kiran recovered, though she was
still very weak. There was a pinched look on her face which filled the
beholder with pity, and made his heart tremble, as he thought how
narrowly she had escaped death.

Kiran was fond of society and amusement; the loneliness of her
riverside villa did not suit her at all. There was nothing to do,
there were no interesting neighbours, and she hated to be busy all
day with medicine and dieting. There was no fun in measuring doses
and making fomentations. Such was the subject discussed in their
closed room on this stormy evening.

So long as Kiran deigned to argue, there was a chance of a fair fight.
When she ceased to reply, and with a toss of her head disconsolately
looked the other way, the poor man was disarmed. He was on the point
of surrendering unconditionally when a servant shouted a message
through the shut door.

Sharat got up, and, opening the door, learnt that a boat had been upset
in the storm, and that one of the occupants, a young Brahmin boy, had
succeeded in swimming ashore in their garden.

Kiran was at once her own sweet self, and set to work to get out some
dry clothes for the boy. She then warmed a cup of milk, and invited him
to her room.

The boy had long curly hair, big expressive eyes, and no sign yet of
hair on the face. Kiran, after getting him to drink some milk, asked
him all about himself.

He told her that his name was Nilkanta, and that he belonged to a
theatrical troupe. They were coming to play in a neighbouring villa
when the boat had suddenly foundered in the storm. He had no idea
what had become of his companions. He was a good swimmer, and had
just managed to reach the shore.

The boy stayed with them. His narrow escape from a terrible death
made Kiran take a warm interest in him. Sharat thought the boy's
appearance at this moment rather a good thing, as his wife would now
have something to amuse her, and might be persuaded to stay on for some
time longer. Her mother-in-law, too, was pleased at the prospect of
profiting their Brahmin guest by her kindness. And Nilkanta himself was
delighted at his double escape from his master and from the other
world, as well as at finding a home in this wealthy family.

But in a short while Sharat and his mother changed their opinion, and
longed for his departure. The boy found a secret pleasure in smoking
Sharat's hookas; he would calmly go off in pouring rain with Sharat's
best silk umbrella for a stroll through the village, and make friends
with all whom he met. Moreover, he had got hold of a mongrel village
dog which he petted so recklessly that it came indoors with muddy paws,
and left tokens of its visit on Sharat's spotless bed. Then he gathered
about him a devoted band of boys of all sorts and sizes, and the result
was that not a solitary mango in the neighbourhood had a chance of
ripening that season.

There is no doubt that Kiran had a hand in spoiling the boy. Sharat
often warned her about it, but she would not listen to him. She made a
dandy of him with Sharat's cast-off clothes, and gave him new ones
too. And because she felt drawn towards him, and also had a curiosity
to know more about him, she was constantly calling him to her own
room. After her bath and mid-day meal Kiran would be seated on the
bedstead with her betel-leaf box by her side; and while her maid
combed and dried her hair, Nilkanta would stand in front and recite
pieces out of his repertory with appropriate gesture and song, his
elf-locks waving wildly. Thus the long afternoon hours passed merrily
away. Kiran would often try to persuade Sharat to sit with her as
one of the audience, but Sharat, who had taken a cordial dislike to
the boy, refused, nor could Nilkanta do his part half so well when
Sharat was there. His mother would sometimes be lured by the hope
of hearing sacred names in the recitation; but love of her mid-day
sleep speedily overcame devotion, and she lay lapped in dreams.

The boy often got his ears boxed and pulled by Sharat, but as this
was nothing to what he had been used to as a member of the troupe,
he did not mind it in the least. In his short experience of the world
he had come to the conclusion that, as the earth consisted of land and
water, so human life was made up of eatings and beatings, and that
the beatings largely predominated.

It was hard to tell Nilkanta's age. If it was about fourteen or
fifteen, then his face was too old for his years; if seventeen or
eighteen, then it was too young. He was either a man too early or
a boy too late. The fact was that, joining the theatrical band when
very young, he had played the parts of Radhika, Damaynti, Sita, and
Bidya's Companion. A thoughtful Providence so arranged things that
he grew to the exact stature that his manager required, and then
growth ceased. Since every one saw how small he was, and he himself
felt small, he did not receive due respect for his years. These
causes, natural and artificial, combined to make him sometimes seem
immature for seventeen years, and at other times a lad of fourteen
but far too knowing for seventeen. And as no sign of hair appeared on
his face, the confusion became greater. Either because he smoked
or because he used language beyond his years, his lips puckered into
lines that showed him to be old and hard; but innocence and youth
shone in his large eyes. I fancy that his heart remained young, but
the hot glare of publicity had been a forcing-house that ripened
untimely his outward aspect.

In the quiet shelter of Sharat's house and garden at Chandernagore,
Nature had leisure to work her way unimpeded. He had lingered in a kind
of unnatural youth, but now he silently and swiftly overpassed that
stage. His seventeen or eighteen years came to adequate revelation. No
one observed the change, and its first sign was this, that when Kiran
treated him like a boy, he felt ashamed. When the gay Kiran one
day proposed that he should play the part of lady's companion, the
idea of woman's dress hurt him, though he could not say why. So now,
when she called for him to act over again his old characters, he
disappeared. It never occurred to him that he was even now not much
more than a lad-of-all-work in a strolling company. He even made up
his mind to pick up a little education from Sharat's factor. But,
because Nilkanta was the pet of his master's wife, the factor could
not endure the sight of him. Also, his restless training made it
impossible for him to keep his mind long engaged; presently, the
alphabet did a misty dance before his eyes. He would sit long enough
with an open book on his lap, leaning against a _champak_ bush
beside the Ganges. The waves sighed below, boats floated past,
birds flitted and twittered restlessly above. What thoughts passed
through his mind as he looked down on that book he alone knew, if
indeed he did know. He never advanced from one word to another, but
the glorious thought that he was actually reading a book filled his
soul with exultation. Whenever a boat went by, he lifted his book, and
pretended to be reading hard, shouting at the top of his voice. But
his energy dropped as soon as the audience was gone.

Formerly he sang his songs automatically, but now their tunes stirred
in his mind. Their words were of little import, and full of trifling
alliteration. Even the little meaning they had was beyond his
comprehension; yet when he sang--

    Twice-born[42] bird! ah! wherefore stirred
      To wrong our royal lady?
    Goose, ah! say why wilt thou slay
      Her in forest shady?[43]

then he felt as if transported to another world, and to far other folk.
This familiar earth and his own poor life became music, and he was
transformed. That tale of goose and king's daughter flung upon the
mirror of his mind a picture of surpassing beauty. It is impossible to
say what he imagined he himself was, but the destitute little slave
of the theatrical troupe faded from his memory.

  [42] Once in the egg, and again once out of the egg.

  [43] See note on Damaynti.

When with evening the child of want lies down, dirty and hungry, in
his squalid home, and hears of prince and princess and fabled gold,
then in the dark hovel with its dim flickering candle, his mind springs
free from her bonds of poverty and misery, and walks in fresh beauty
and glowing raiment, strong beyond all fear of hindrance, through that
fairy realm where all is possible.

Even so, this drudge of wandering players fashioned himself and
his world anew, as he moved in spirit amid his songs. The lapping
water, rustling leaves, and calling birds; the goddess who had given
shelter to him, the helpless, the Godforsaken; her gracious, lovely
face, her exquisite arms with their shining bangles, her rosy feet
as soft as flower-petals; all these by some magic became one with
the music of his song. When the singing ended, the mirage faded, and
Nilkanta of the stage appeared again, with his wild elf-locks. Fresh
from the complaints of his neighbour, the owner of the despoiled
mango-orchard, Sharat would come and box his ears, and cuff him. The
boy Nilkanta, the misleader of adoring youths, went forth once more,
to make ever new mischief by land and water and in the branches that
are above the earth.

Shortly after the advent of Nilkanta, Sharat's younger brother, Satish,
came to spend his college vacation with them. Kiran was hugely pleased
at finding a fresh occupation. She and Satish were of the same age,
and the time passed pleasantly in games and quarrels and makings-up
and laughter and even tears. Suddenly she would clasp him over the
eyes, from behind, with vermilion-stained hands, she would write
'monkey' on his back, and sometimes bolt the door on him from outside
amidst peals of laughter. Satish in his turn did not take things
lying down; he would take her keys and rings, he would put pepper
among her betel; he would tie her to the bed when she was not looking.

Meanwhile, heaven only knows what possessed poor Nilkanta. He was
suddenly filled with a bitterness which he must avenge on somebody
or something. He thrashed his devoted boy-followers for no fault, and
sent them away crying. He would kick his pet mongrel till it made the
skies resound with its whinings. When he went out for a walk, he would
litter his path with twigs and leaves beaten from the roadside shrubs
with his cane.

Kiran liked to see people enjoying good fare. Nilkanta had an immense
capacity for eating, and never refused a good thing, however often it
was offered. So Kiran liked to send for him to have his meals in
her presence, and ply him with delicacies, happy in the bliss of
seeing this Brahmin boy eat to satiety. After Satish's arrival she
had much less spare time on her hands, and was seldom present when
Nilkanta's meals were served. Before, her absence made no difference
to the boy's appetite, and he would not rise till he had drained his
cup of milk, and rinsed it thoroughly with water.[44]

  [44] A habit which was relic from his days of poverty, when milk was
  too rare a luxury to allow of even its stains in the cup being wasted.

But now, if Kiran was not present to ask him to try this and that,
he was miserable, and nothing tasted right. He would get up without
eating much, and say to the serving-maid in a choking voice: 'I am
not hungry.' He thought in imagination that the news of his repeated
refusal, 'I am not hungry,' would reach Kiran; he pictured her
concern, and hoped that she would send for him, and press him to eat.
But nothing of the sort happened. Kiran never knew, and never sent for
him; and the maid finished whatever he left. He would then put out
the lamp in his room, and throw himself on his bed in the darkness,
burying his head in the pillow in a paroxysm of sobs. What was his
grievance? Against whom? And from whom did he expect redress? At last,
when none else came, Mother Sleep soothed with her soft caresses
the wounded heart of the motherless lad.

Nilkanta came to the unshakable conviction that Satish was poisoning
Kiran's mind against him. If Kiran was absent-minded, and had not her
usual smile, he would jump to the conclusion that some trick of Satish
had made her angry with him. He took to praying to the gods, with all
the fervour of his hate, to make him at the next rebirth Satish, and
Satish him. He had an idea that a Brahmin's wrath could never be in
vain; and the more he tried to consume Satish with the fire of his
curses, the more did his own heart burn within him. And upstairs he
would hear Satish laughing and joking with his sister-in-law.

Nilkanta never dared openly to show his enmity to Satish. But he
would contrive a hundred petty ways of causing him annoyance. When
Satish went for a swim in the river, and left his soap on the steps
of the bathing-place, on coming back for it he would find that it
had disappeared. Once he found his favourite striped tunic floating
past him on the water, and thought it had been blown away by the wind.

One day Kiran, desiring to entertain Satish, sent for Nilkanta to
recite as usual, but he stood there in gloomy silence. Quite surprised,
Kiran asked him what was the matter. But he remained silent. And when
again pressed by her to repeat some particular favourite piece of
hers, he answered: 'I don't remember,' and walked away.

At last the time came for their return home. Everybody was busy packing
up. Satish was going with them. But to Nilkanta nobody said a word.
The question whether he was to go or not seemed not to have occurred
to anybody.

The question, as a matter of fact, had been raised by Kiran, who had
proposed to take him along with them. But her husband and his mother
and brother had all objected so strenuously that she let the matter
drop. A couple of days before they were to start, she sent for the boy,
and with kind words advised him to go back to his own home.

So many days had he felt neglected that this touch of kindness was
too much for him; he burst into tears. Kiran's eyes were also brimming
over. She was filled with remorse at the thought that she had created
a tie of affection, which could not be permanent.

But Satish was much annoyed at the blubbering of this overgrown boy.
'Why does the fool stand there howling instead of speaking?' said
he. When Kiran scolded him for an unfeeling creature, he replied:
'Sister mine, you do not understand. You are too good and trustful.
This fellow turns up from the Lord knows where, and is treated like
a king. Naturally the tiger has no wish to become a mouse again.[45]
And he has evidently discovered that there is nothing like a tear
or two to soften your heart.'

  [45] A reference to a folk-story of a saint who turned a pet mouse
  into a tiger.

Nilkanta hurriedly left the spot. He felt he would like to be a knife
to cut Satish to pieces; a needle to pierce him through and through; a
fire to burn him to ashes. But Satish was not even scarred. It was only
his own heart that bled and bled.

Satish had brought with him from Calcutta a grand inkstand. The inkpot
was set in a mother-of-pearl boat drawn by a German-silver goose
supporting a penholder. It was a great favourite of his, and he cleaned
it carefully every day with an old silk handkerchief. Kiran would
laugh and, tapping the silver bird's beak, would say--

    Twice-born bird, ah! wherefore stirred
      To wrong our royal lady?

and the usual war of words would break out between her and her
brother-in-law.

The day before they were to start, the inkstand was missing, and could
nowhere be found. Kiran smiled, and said: 'Brother-in-law, your goose
has flown off to look for your Damaynti.'[46]

  [46] To find Satish a wife.

But Satish was in a great rage. He was certain that Nilkanta had stolen
it--for several people said they had seen him prowling about the room
the night before. He had the accused brought before him. Kiran also
was there. 'You have stolen my inkstand, you thief!' he blurted out.
'Bring it back at once.' Nilkanta had always taken punishment from
Sharat, deserved or undeserved, with perfect equanimity. But, when
he was called a thief in Kiran's presence, his eyes blazed with a
fierce anger, his breast swelled, and his throat choked. If Satish had
said another word he would have flown at him like a wild cat, and used
his nails like claws.

Kiran was greatly distressed at the scene, and taking the boy into
another room said in her sweet, kind way: 'Nilu, if you really have
taken that inkstand give it to me quietly, and I shall see that no
one says another word to you about it.' Big tears coursed down the
boy's cheeks, till at last he hid his face in his hands, and wept
bitterly. Kiran came back from the room, and said: 'I am sure Nilkanta
has not taken the inkstand.' Sharat and Satish were equally positive
that no other than Nilkanta could have done it.

But Kiran said determinedly: 'Never.'

Sharat wanted to cross-examine the boy, but his wife refused to allow
it.

Then Satish suggested that his room and box should be searched. And
Kiran said: 'If you dare do such a thing I will never, never forgive
you. You shall not spy on the poor innocent boy.' And as she spoke,
her wonderful eyes filled with tears. That settled the matter, and
effectually prevented any further molestation of Nilkanta!

Kiran's heart overflowed with pity at this attempted outrage on a
homeless lad. She got two new suits of clothes and a pair of shoes, and
with these and a banknote in her hand she quietly went into Nilkanta's
room in the evening. She intended to put these parting presents into
his box as a surprise. The box itself had been her gift.

From her bunch of keys she selected one that fitted, and noiselessly
opened the box. It was so jumbled up with odds and ends that the new
clothes would not go in. So she thought she had better take everything
out and pack the box for him. At first knives, tops, kite-flying
reels, bamboo twigs, polished shells for peeling green mangoes, bottoms
of broken tumblers and such like things dear to a boy's heart were
discovered. Then there came a layer of linen, clean and otherwise.
And from under the linen there emerged the missing inkstand, goose
and all!

Kiran, with flushed face, sat down helplessly with the inkstand in her
hand, puzzled and wondering.

In the meantime, Nilkanta had come into the room from behind without
Kiran knowing it. He had seen the whole thing, and thought that Kiran
had come like a thief to catch him in his thieving,--and that his deed
was out. How could he ever hope to convince her that he was not a
thief, and that only revenge had prompted him to take the inkstand,
which he meant to throw into the river at the first chance? In a weak
moment he had put it in his box instead. 'He was not a thief,' his
heart cried out, 'not a thief!' Then what was he? What could he say?
He had stolen, and yet he was not a thief! He could never explain
to Kiran how grievously wrong she was in taking him for a thief; how
could he bear the thought that she had tried to spy on him?

At last Kiran with a deep sigh replaced the inkstand in the box, and,
as if she were the thief herself, covered it up with the linen and the
trinkets as they were before; and at the top she placed the presents
together with the banknote which she had brought for him.

The next day the boy was nowhere to be found. The villagers had not
seen him; the police could discover no trace of him. Said Sharat:
'Now, as a matter of curiosity, let us have a look at his box.' But
Kiran was obstinate in her refusal to allow that to be done.

She had the box brought up to her own room; and taking out the inkstand
alone, threw it into the river.

The whole family went home. In a day the garden became desolate. And
only that starving mongrel of Nilkanta's remained prowling along the
river-bank, whining and whining as if its heart would break.




SAVED


Gouri was the beautiful, delicately nurtured child of an old and
wealthy family. Her husband, Paresh, had recently by his own efforts
improved his straitened circumstances. So long as he was poor, Gouri's
parents had kept their daughter at home, unwilling to surrender her
to privation; so she was no longer young when at last she went to her
husband's house. And Paresh never felt quite that she belonged to
him. He was an advocate in a small western town, and had no close
kinsman with him. All his thought was about his wife, so much so that
sometimes he would come home before the rising of the Court. At
first Gouri was at a loss to understand why he came back suddenly.
Sometimes, too, he would dismiss one of the servants without reason;
none of them ever suited him long. Especially if Gouri desired to
keep any particular servant because he was useful, that man was
sure to be got rid of forthwith. The high-spirited Gouri greatly
resented this, but her resentment only made her husband's behaviour
still stranger.

At last when Paresh, unable to contain himself any longer, began in
secret to cross-question the maid about her, the whole thing reached
his wife's ears. She was a woman of few words; but her pride raged
within like a wounded lioness at these insults, and this mad suspicion
swept like a destroyer's sword between them. Paresh, as soon as he saw
that his wife understood his motive, felt no more delicacy about
taxing Gouri to her face; and the more his wife treated it with silent
contempt, the more did the fire of his jealousy consume him.

Deprived of wedded happiness, the childless Gouri betook herself to the
consolations of religion. She sent for Paramananda Swami, the young
preacher of the Prayer-House hard by, and, formally acknowledging him
as her spiritual preceptor, asked him to expound the _Gita_ to her. All
the wasted love and affection of her woman's heart was poured out in
reverence at the feet of her Guru.

No one had any doubts about the purity of Paramananda's character.
All worshipped him. And because Paresh did not dare to hint at any
suspicion against him, his jealousy ate its way into his heart like a
hidden cancer.

One day some trifling circumstance made the poison overflow. Paresh
reviled Paramananda to his wife as a hypocrite, and said: 'Can you
swear that you are not in love with this crane that plays the ascetic?'

Gouri sprang up like a snake that has been trodden on, and, maddened
by his suspicion, said with bitter irony: 'And what if I am?' At
this Paresh forthwith went off to the Court-house, and locked the door
on her.

In a white heat of passion at this last outrage, Gouri got the door
open somehow, and left the house.

Paramananda was poring over the scriptures in his lonely room in
the silence of noon. All at once, like a flash of lightning out of a
cloudless sky, Gouri broke in upon his reading.

'You here?' questioned her Guru in surprise.

'Rescue me, O my lord Guru,' said she, 'from the insults of my home
life, and allow me to dedicate myself to the service of your feet.'

With a stern rebuke, Paramananda sent Gouri back home. But I wonder
whether he ever again took up the snapped thread of his reading.

Paresh, finding the door open, on his return home, asked: 'Who has
been here?'

'No one!' his wife replied. '_I_ have been to the house of my Guru.'

'Why?' asked Paresh, pale and red by turns.

'Because I wanted to.'

From that day Paresh had a guard kept over the house, and behaved so
absurdly that the tale of his jealousy was told all over the town.

The news of the shameful insults that were daily heaped on his disciple
disturbed the religious meditations of Paramananda. He felt he ought to
leave the place at once; at the same time he could not make up his
mind to forsake the tortured woman. Who can say how the poor ascetic
got through those terrible days and nights?

At last one day the imprisoned Gouri got a letter. 'My child,' it
ran, 'it is true that many holy women have left the world to devote
themselves to God. Should it happen that the trials of this world are
driving your thoughts away from God, I will with God's help rescue his
handmaid for the holy service of his feet. If you desire, you may meet
me by the tank in your garden at two o'clock to-morrow afternoon.'

Gouri hid the letter in the loops of her hair. At noon next day when
she was undoing her hair before her bath she found that the letter
was not there. Could it have fallen on to the bed and got into her
husband's hands, she wondered. At first, she felt a kind of fierce
pleasure in thinking that it would enrage him; and then she could not
bear to think that this letter, worn as a halo of deliverance on her
head, might be defiled by the touch of insolent hands.

With swift steps she hurried to her husband's room. He lay groaning on
the floor, with eyes rolled back and foaming mouth. She detached the
letter from his clenched fist, and sent quickly for a doctor.

The doctor said it was a case of apoplexy. The patient had died before
his arrival.

That very day, as it happened, Paresh had an important appointment away
from home. Paramananda had found this out, and accordingly had made
his appointment with Gouri. To such a depth had he fallen!

When the widowed Gouri caught sight from the window of her Guru
stealing like a thief to the side of the pool, she lowered her eyes
as at a lightning flash. And in that flash she saw clearly what a fall
his had been.

The Guru called: 'Gouri.'

'I am coming,' she replied.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Paresh's friends heard of his death, and came to assist in the
last rites, they found the dead body of Gouri lying beside that of her
husband. She had poisoned herself. All were lost in admiration of the
wifely loyalty she had shown in her _sati_, a loyalty rare indeed in
these degenerate days.




MY FAIR NEIGHBOUR


My feelings towards the young widow who lived in the next house to
mine were feelings of worship; at least, that is what I told to my
friends and myself. Even my nearest intimate, Nabin, knew nothing of
the real state of my mind. And I had a sort of pride that I could keep
my passion pure by thus concealing it in the inmost recesses of my
heart. She was like a dew-drenched _sephali_-blossom, untimely fallen
to earth. Too radiant and holy for the flower-decked marriage-bed,
she had been dedicated to Heaven.

But passion is like the mountain stream, and refuses to be enclosed in
the place of its birth; it must seek an outlet. That is why I tried to
give expression to my emotions in poems; but my unwilling pen refused
to desecrate the object of my worship.

It happened curiously that just at this time my friend Nabin was
afflicted with a madness of verse. It came upon him like an earthquake.
It was the poor fellow's first attack, and he was equally unprepared
for rhyme and rhythm. Nevertheless he could not refrain, for he
succumbed to the fascination, as a widower to his second wife.

So Nabin sought help from me. The subject of his poems was the old, old
one, which is ever new: his poems were all addressed to the beloved
one. I slapped his back in jest, and asked him: 'Well, old chap, who
is she?'

Nabin laughed, as he replied: 'That I have not yet discovered!'

I confess that I found considerable comfort in bringing help to my
friend. Like a hen brooding on a duck's egg, I lavished all the warmth
of my pent-up passion on Nabin's effusions. So vigorously did I revise
and improve his crude productions, that the larger part of each poem
became my own.

Then Nabin would say in surprise: 'That is just what I wanted to say,
but could not. How on earth do you manage to get hold of all these
fine sentiments?'

Poet-like, I would reply: 'They come from my imagination; for, as you
know, truth is silent, and it is imagination only which waxes
eloquent. Reality represses the flow of feeling like a rock;
imagination cuts out a path for itself.'

And the poor puzzled Nabin would say: 'Y-e-s, I see, yes, of course';
and then after some thought would murmur again: 'Yes, yes, you are
right!'

As I have already said, in my own love there was a feeling of
reverential delicacy which prevented me from putting it into words.
But with Nabin as a screen, there was nothing to hinder the flow
of my pen; and a true warmth of feeling gushed out into these
vicarious poems.

Nabin in his lucid moments would say: 'But these are yours! Let me
publish them over your name.'

'Nonsense!' I would reply. 'They are yours, my dear fellow; I have
only added a touch or two here and there.'

And Nabin gradually came to believe it.

I will not deny that, with a feeling akin to that of the astronomer
gazing into the starry heavens, I did sometimes turn my eyes towards
the window of the house next door. It is also true that now and again
my furtive glances would be rewarded with a vision. And the least
glimpse of the pure light of that countenance would at once still
and clarify all that was turbulent and unworthy in my emotions.

But one day I was startled. Could I believe my eyes? It was a hot
summer afternoon. One of the fierce and fitful nor'-westers was
threatening. Black clouds were massed in the north-west corner of the
sky; and against the strange and fearful light of that background
my fair neighbour stood, gazing out into empty space. And what a
world of forlorn longing did I discover in the far-away look of
those lustrous black eyes! Was there then, perchance, still some
living volcano within the serene radiance of that moon of mine?
Alas! that look of limitless yearning, which was winging its way
through the clouds like an eager bird, surely sought--not heaven--but
the nest of some human heart!

At the sight of the unutterable passion of that look I could hardly
contain myself. I was no longer satisfied with correcting crude poems.
My whole being longed to express itself in some worthy action. At last
I thought I would devote myself to making widow-remarriage popular in
my country. I was prepared not only to speak and write on the subject,
but also to spend money on its cause.

Nabin began to argue with me. 'Permanent widowhood,' said he, 'has
in it a sense of immense purity and peace; a calm beauty like that of
the silent places of the dead shimmering in the wan light of the
eleventh moon.[47] Would not the mere possibility of remarriage destroy
its divine beauty?'

  [47] The eleventh day of the moon is a day of fasting and penance.

Now this sort of sentimentality always makes me furious. In time of
famine, if a well-fed man speaks scornfully of food, and advises a
starving man at point of death to glut his hunger on the fragrance
of flowers and the song of birds, what are we to think of him? I
said with some heat: 'Look here, Nabin, to the artist a ruin may be a
beautiful object; but houses are built not only for the contemplation
of artists, but that people may live therein; so they have to be
kept in repair in spite of artistic susceptibilities. It is all very
well for you to idealise widowhood from your safe distance, but you
should remember that within widowhood there is a sensitive human
heart, throbbing with pain and desire.'

I had an impression that the conversion of Nabin would be a difficult
matter, so perhaps I was more impassioned than I need have been. I was
somewhat surprised to find at the conclusion of my little speech that
Nabin after a single thoughtful sigh completely agreed with me. The
even more convincing peroration which I felt I might have delivered
was not needed!

After about a week Nabin came to me, and said that if I would help him
he was prepared to lead the way by marrying a widow himself.

I was overjoyed. I embraced him effusively, and promised him any money
that might be required for the purpose. Then Nabin told me his story.

I learned that Nabin's loved one was not an imaginary being. It
appeared that Nabin, too, had for some time adored a widow from a
distance, but had not spoken of his feelings to any living soul.
Then the magazines in which Nabin's poems, or rather _my_ poems,
used to appear had reached the fair one's hands; and the poems had
not been ineffective.

Not that Nabin had deliberately intended, as he was careful to explain,
to conduct love-making in that way. In fact, said he, he had no
idea that the widow knew how to read. He used to post the magazine,
without disclosing the sender's name, addressed to the widow's
brother. It was only a sort of fancy of his, a concession to his
hopeless passion. It was flinging garlands before a deity; it is not
the worshipper's affair whether the god knows or not, whether he
accepts or ignores the offering.

And Nabin particularly wanted me to understand that he had no
definite end in view when on diverse pretexts he sought and made the
acquaintance of the widow's brother. Any near relation of the loved
one needs must have a special interest for the lover.

Then followed a long story about how an illness of the brother at last
brought them together. The presence of the poet himself naturally led
to much discussion of the poems; nor was the discussion necessarily
restricted to the subject out of which it arose.

After his recent defeat in argument at my hands, Nabin had mustered
up courage to propose marriage to the widow. At first he could not
gain her consent. But when he had made full use of my eloquent words,
supplemented by a tear or two of his own, the fair one capitulated
unconditionally. Some money was now wanted by her guardian to make
arrangements.

'Take it at once,' said I.

'But,' Nabin went on, 'you know it will be some months before I can
appease my father sufficiently for him to continue my allowance. How
are we to live in the meantime?' I wrote out the necessary cheque
without a word, and then I said: 'Now tell me who she is. You need
not look on me as a possible rival, for I swear I will not write poems
to her; and even if I do I will not send them to her brother, but to
you!'

'Don't be absurd,' said Nabin; 'I have not kept back her name
because I feared your rivalry! The fact is, she was very much perturbed
at taking this unusual step, and had asked me not to talk about the
matter to my friends. But it no longer matters, now that everything
has been satisfactorily settled. She lives at No. 19, the house next to
yours.'

If my heart had been an iron boiler it would have burst. 'So she has
no objection to remarriage?' I simply asked.

'Not at the present moment,' replied Nabin with a smile.

'And was it the poems alone which wrought the magic change?'

'Well, my poems were not so bad, you know,' said Nabin, 'were they?'

I swore mentally.

But at whom was I to swear? At him? At myself? At Providence? All the
same, I swore.


THE END


_Printed by R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburgh._




  [ Transcriber's Note:

    The following is a list of corrections made to the original. The first
    line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

  I bothered my brother about it so much that he at once ordered all the
  'I bothered my brother about it so much that he at once ordered all the


  'I am not coming back.
  'I am not coming back.'

  has flown off to look for your Damaynti."[46]
  has flown off to look for your Damaynti.'[46]

  ]





End of Project Gutenberg's Mashi and Other Stories, by Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASHI, AND OTHER STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Nationalism
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Nationalism

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: September 15, 2012 [eBook #40766]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by sp1nd, ewkent, Martin Pettit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONALISM ***




Produced by sp1nd, ewkent, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






WORKS BY

SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE


+GITANJALI (Song Offerings).+ With Introduction by W. B. YEATS and
Portrait. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

+FRUIT-GATHERING. (A Sequel to "Gitanjali.")+ Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

+THE CRESCENT MOON. Child-Poems.+ With 8 Illustrations in Colour.
Pott 4to. 4s. 6d. net.

+THE GARDENER. Poems.+ With Portrait. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

+STRAY BIRDS. Poems.+ With Frontispiece by WILLY POGÁNY. Cr. 8vo. 4s.
6d. net.

+LOVER'S GIFT AND CROSSING.+ Cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

+CHITRA. A Play.+ Ex. cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.

+THE KING OF THE DARK CHAMBER. A Play.+ Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

+THE POST OFFICE. A Play.+ Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net.

+THE CYCLE OF SPRING. A Play.+ Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. net.

+SACRIFICE AND OTHER PLAYS.+ Cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

+HUNGRY STONES AND OTHER STORIES.+ Translated by various Writers. Cr.
8vo. 5s. net.

+MASHI AND OTHER STORIES.+ Cr. 8vo. 5s. net.

+PERSONALITY: Lectures delivered in America.+ Illustrated. Ex. cr.
8vo. 5s. net.

+MY REMINISCENCES.+ Illustrated. Ex. cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

+SADHANA: The Realisation of Life. Lectures.+ Ex. cr. 8vo. 5s.
net.

+NATIONALISM.+ Ex. cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.


LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.




NATIONALISM


[Illustration: Logo]

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA · MADRAS
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
DALLAS · SAN FRANCISCO

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.

TORONTO




NATIONALISM

BY

SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
1918


COPYRIGHT

_First Edition 1917_
_Reprinted 1918 (twice)_




CONTENTS

                              PAGE
NATIONALISM IN THE WEST          1

NATIONALISM IN JAPAN            47

NATIONALISM IN INDIA            95

THE SUNSET OF THE CENTURY      131




NATIONALISM IN THE WEST


Man's history is being shaped according to the difficulties it
encounters. These have offered us problems and claimed their solutions
from us, the penalty of non-fulfilment being death or degradation.

These difficulties have been different in different peoples of the
earth, and in the manner of our overcoming them lies our distinction.

The Scythians of the earlier period of Asiatic history had to struggle
with the scarcity of their natural resources. The easiest solution that
they could think of was to organize their whole population, men, women,
and children, into bands of robbers. And they were irresistible to those
who were chiefly engaged in the constructive work of social
co-operation.

But fortunately for man the easiest path is not his truest path. If his
nature were not as complex as it is, if it were as simple as that of a
pack of hungry wolves, then, by this time, those hordes of marauders
would have overrun the whole earth. But man, when confronted with
difficulties, has to acknowledge that he is man, that he has his
responsibilities to the higher faculties of his nature, by ignoring
which he may achieve success that is immediate, perhaps, but that will
become a death-trap to him. For what are obstacles to the lower
creatures are opportunities to the higher life of man.

To India has been given her problem from the beginning of history--it is
the race problem. Races ethnologically different have in this country
come into close contact. This fact has been and still continues to be
the most important one in our history. It is our mission to face it and
prove our humanity by dealing with it in the fullest truth. Until we
fulfil our mission all other benefits will be denied us.

There are other peoples in the world who have to overcome obstacles in
their physical surroundings, or the menace of their powerful neighbours.
They have organized their power till they are not only reasonably free
from the tyranny of Nature and human neighbours, but have a surplus of
it left in their hands to employ against others. But in India, our
difficulties being internal, our history has been the history of
continual social adjustment and not that of organized power for defence
and aggression.

Neither the colourless vagueness of cosmopolitanism, nor the fierce
self-idolatry of nation-worship, is the goal of human history. And India
has been trying to accomplish her task through social regulation of
differences, on the one hand, and the spiritual recognition of unity on
the other. She has made grave errors in setting up the boundary walls
too rigidly between races, in perpetuating in her classifications the
results of inferiority; often she has crippled her children's minds and
narrowed their lives in order to fit them into her social forms; but for
centuries new experiments have been made and adjustments carried out.

Her mission has been like that of a hostess who has to provide proper
accommodation for numerous guests, whose habits and requirements are
different from one another. This gives rise to infinite complexities
whose solution depends not merely upon tactfulness but upon sympathy and
true realization of the unity of man. Towards this realization have
worked, from the early time of the Upanishads up to the present moment,
a series of great spiritual teachers, whose one object has been to set
at naught all differences of man by the overflow of our consciousness of
God. In fact, our history has not been of the rise and fall of kingdoms,
of fights for political supremacy. In our country records of these days
have been despised and forgotten, for they in no way represent the true
history of our people. Our history is that of our social life and
attainment of spiritual ideals.

But we feel that our task is not yet done. The world-flood has swept
over our country, new elements have been introduced, and wider
adjustments are waiting to be made.

We feel this all the more, because the teaching and example of the West
have entirely run counter to what we think was given to India to
accomplish. In the West the national machinery of commerce and politics
turns out neatly compressed bales of humanity which have their use and
high market value; but they are bound in iron hoops, labelled and
separated off with scientific care and precision. Obviously God made man
to be human; but this modern product has such marvellous square-cut
finish, savouring of gigantic manufacture, that the Creator will find it
difficult to recognize it as a thing of spirit and a creature made in
His own divine image.

But I am anticipating. What I was about to say is this. Take it in
whatever spirit you like, here is India, of about fifty centuries at
least, who tried to live peacefully and think deeply, the India devoid
of all politics, the India of no nations, whose one ambition has been to
know this world as of soul, to live here every moment of her life in the
meek spirit of adoration, in the glad consciousness of an eternal and
personal relationship with it. It was upon this remote portion of
humanity, childlike in its manner, with the wisdom of the old, that the
Nation of the West burst in.

Through all the fights and intrigues and deceptions of her earlier
history India had remained aloof. Because her homes, her fields, her
temples of worship, her schools, where her teachers and students lived
together in the atmosphere of simplicity and devotion and learning, her
village self-government with its simple laws and peaceful
administration--all these truly belonged to her. But her thrones were
not her concern. They passed over her head like clouds, now tinged with
purple gorgeousness, now black with the threat of thunder. Often they
brought devastations in their wake, but they were like catastrophes of
nature whose traces are soon forgotten.

But this time it was different. It was not a mere drift over her
surface of life,--drift of cavalry and foot soldiers, richly caparisoned
elephants, white tents and canopies, strings of patient camels bearing
the loads of royalty, bands of kettle-drums and flutes, marble domes of
mosques, palaces and tombs, like the bubbles of the foaming wine of
extravagance; stories of treachery and loyal devotion, of changes of
fortune, of dramatic surprises of fate. This time it was the Nation of
the West driving its tentacles of machinery deep down into the soil.

Therefore I say to you, it is we who are called as witnesses to give
evidence as to what our Nation has been to humanity. We had known the
hordes of Moghals and Pathans who invaded India, but we had known them
as human races, with their own religions and customs, likes and
dislikes,--we had never known them as a nation. We loved and hated them
as occasions arose; we fought for them and against them, talked with
them in a language which was theirs as well as our own, and guided the
destiny of the Empire in which we had our active share. But this time we
had to deal, not with kings, not with human races, but with a
nation--we, who are no nation ourselves.

Now let us from our own experience answer the question, What is this
Nation?

A nation, in the sense of the political and economic union of a people,
is that aspect which a whole population assumes when organized for a
mechanical purpose. Society as such has no ulterior purpose. It is an
end in itself. It is a spontaneous self-expression of man as a social
being. It is a natural regulation of human relationships, so that men
can develop ideals of life in co-operation with one another. It has also
a political side, but this is only for a special purpose. It is for
self-preservation. It is merely the side of power, not of human ideals.
And in the early days it had its separate place in society, restricted
to the professionals. But when with the help of science and the
perfecting of organization this power begins to grow and brings in
harvests of wealth, then it crosses its boundaries with amazing
rapidity. For then it goads all its neighbouring societies with greed of
material prosperity, and consequent mutual jealousy, and by the fear of
each other's growth into powerfulness. The time comes when it can stop
no longer, for the competition grows keener, organization grows vaster,
and selfishness attains supremacy. Trading upon the greed and fear of
man, it occupies more and more space in society, and at last becomes its
ruling force.

It is just possible that you have lost through habit consciousness that
the living bonds of society are breaking up, and giving place to merely
mechanical organization. But you see signs of it everywhere. It is owing
to this that war has been declared between man and woman, because the
natural thread is snapping which holds them together in harmony; because
man is driven to professionalism, producing wealth for himself and
others, continually turning the wheel of power for his own sake or for
the sake of the universal officialdom, leaving woman alone to wither and
to die or to fight her own battle unaided. And thus there where
co-operation is natural has intruded competition. The very psychology of
men and women about their mutual relation is changing and becoming the
psychology of the primitive fighting elements, rather than of humanity
seeking its completeness through the union based upon mutual
self-surrender. For the elements which have lost their living bond of
reality have lost the meaning of their existence. Like gaseous particles
forced into a too narrow space, they come in continual conflict with
each other till they burst the very arrangement which holds them in
bondage.

Then look at those who call themselves anarchists, who resent the
imposition of power, in any form whatever, upon the individual. The only
reason for this is that power has become too abstract--it is a
scientific product made in the political laboratory of the Nation,
through the dissolution of personal humanity.

And what is the meaning of these strikes in the economic world, which
like the prickly shrubs in a barren soil shoot up with renewed vigour
each time they are cut down? What, but that the wealth-producing
mechanism is incessantly growing into vast stature, out of proportion to
all other needs of society,--and the full reality of man is more and
more crushed under its weight? This state of things inevitably gives
rise to eternal feuds among the elements freed from the wholeness and
wholesomeness of human ideals, and interminable economic war is waged
between capital and labour. For greed of wealth and power can never have
a limit, and compromise of self-interest can never attain the final
spirit of reconciliation. They must go on breeding jealousy and
suspicion to the end--the end which only comes through some sudden
catastrophe or a spiritual re-birth.

When this organization of politics and commerce, whose other name is the
Nation, becomes all-powerful at the cost of the harmony of the higher
social life, then it is an evil day for humanity. When a father becomes
a gambler and his obligations to his family take the secondary place in
his mind, then he is no longer a man, but an automaton led by the power
of greed. Then he can do things which, in his normal state of mind, he
would be ashamed to do. It is the same thing with society. When it
allows itself to be turned into a perfect organization of power, then
there are few crimes which it is unable to perpetrate. Because success
is the object and justification of a machine, while goodness only is the
end and purpose of man. When this engine of organization begins to
attain a vast size, and those who are mechanics are made into parts of
the machine, then the personal man is eliminated to a phantom,
everything becomes a revolution of policy carried out by the human parts
of the machine, with no twinge of pity or moral responsibility. It may
happen that even through this apparatus the moral nature of man tries
to assert itself, but the whole series of ropes and pullies creak and
cry, the forces of the human heart become entangled among the forces of
the human automaton, and only with difficulty can the moral purpose
transmit itself into some tortured shape of result.

This abstract being, the Nation, is ruling India. We have seen in our
country some brand of tinned food advertised as entirely made and packed
without being touched by hand. This description applies to the governing
of India, which is as little touched by the human hand as possible. The
governors need not know our language, need not come into personal touch
with us except as officials; they can aid or hinder our aspirations from
a disdainful distance, they can lead us on a certain path of policy and
then pull us back again with the manipulation of office red tape; the
newspapers of England, in whose columns London street accidents are
recorded with some decency of pathos, need but take the scantiest notice
of calamities which happen in India over areas of land sometimes larger
than the British Isles.

But we, who are governed, are not a mere abstraction. We, on our side,
are individuals with living sensibilities. What comes to us in the
shape of a mere bloodless policy may pierce into the very core of our
life, may threaten the whole future of our people with a perpetual
helplessness of emasculation, and yet may never touch the chord of
humanity on the other side, or touch it in the most inadequately feeble
manner. Such wholesale and universal acts of fearful responsibility man
can never perform, with such a degree of systematic unawareness, where
he is an individual human being. These only become possible, where the
man is represented by an octopus of abstractions, sending out its
wriggling arms in all directions of space, and fixing its innumerable
suckers even into the far-away future. In this reign of the nation, the
governed are pursued by suspicions; and these are the suspicions of a
tremendous mass of organized brain and muscle. Punishments are meted
out, which leave a trail of miseries across a large bleeding tract of
the human heart; but these punishments are dealt by a mere abstract
force, in which a whole population of a distant country has lost its
human personality.

I have not come here, however, to discuss the question as it affects my
own country, but as it affects the future of all humanity. It is not a
question of the British Government, but of government by the Nation--the
Nation which is the organized self-interest of a whole people, where it
is least human and least spiritual. Our only intimate experience of the
Nation is with the British Nation, and as far as the government by the
Nation goes there are reasons to believe that it is one of the best.
Then, again, we have to consider that the West is necessary to the East.
We are complementary to each other because of our different outlooks
upon life which have given us different aspects of truth. Therefore if
it be true that the spirit of the West has come upon our fields in the
guise of a storm it is nevertheless scattering living seeds that are
immortal. And when in India we become able to assimilate in our life
what is permanent in Western civilization we shall be in the position to
bring about a reconciliation of these two great worlds. Then will come
to an end the one-sided dominance which is galling. What is more, we
have to recognize that the history of India does not belong to one
particular race but to a process of creation to which various races of
the world contributed--the Dravidians and the Aryans, the ancient Greeks
and the Persians, the Mohammedans of the West and those of central
Asia. Now at last has come the turn of the English to become true to
this history and bring to it the tribute of their life, and we neither
have the right nor the power to exclude this people from the building of
the destiny of India. Therefore what I say about the Nation has more to
do with the history of Man than specially with that of India.

This history has come to a stage when the moral man, the complete man,
is more and more giving way, almost without knowing it, to make room for
the political and the commercial man, the man of the limited purpose.
This process, aided by the wonderful progress in science, is assuming
gigantic proportion and power, causing the upset of man's moral balance,
obscuring his human side under the shadow of soul-less organization. We
have felt its iron grip at the root of our life, and for the sake of
humanity we must stand up and give warning to all, that this nationalism
is a cruel epidemic of evil that is sweeping over the human world of the
present age, and eating into its moral vitality.

I have a deep love and a great respect for the British race as human
beings. It has produced great-hearted men, thinkers of great thoughts,
doers of great deeds. It has given rise to a great literature. I know
that these people love justice and freedom, and hate lies. They are
clean in their minds, frank in their manners, true in their friendships;
in their behaviour they are honest and reliable. The personal experience
which I have had of their literary men has roused my admiration not
merely for their power of thought or expression but for their chivalrous
humanity. We have felt the greatness of this people as we feel the sun;
but as for the Nation, it is for us a thick mist of a stifling nature
covering the sun itself.

This government by the Nation is neither British nor anything else; it
is an applied science and therefore more or less similar in its
principles wherever it is used. It is like a hydraulic press, whose
pressure is impersonal, and on that account completely effective. The
amount of its power may vary in different engines. Some may even be
driven by hand, thus leaving a margin of comfortable looseness in their
tension, but in spirit and in method their differences are small. Our
government might have been Dutch, or French, or Portuguese, and its
essential features would have remained much the same as they are now.
Only perhaps, in some cases, the organization might not have been so
densely perfect, and, therefore, some shreds of the human might still
have been clinging to the wreck, allowing us to deal with something
which resembles our own throbbing heart.

Before the Nation came to rule over us we had other governments which
were foreign, and these, like all governments, had some element of the
machine in them. But the difference between them and the government by
the Nation is like the difference between the hand-loom and the
power-loom. In the products of the hand-loom the magic of man's living
fingers finds its expression, and its hum harmonizes with the music of
life. But the power-loom is relentlessly lifeless and accurate and
monotonous in its production.

We must admit that during the personal government of the former days
there have been instances of tyranny, injustice and extortion. They
caused sufferings and unrest from which we are glad to be rescued. The
protection of law is not only a boon, but it is a valuable lesson to us.
It is teaching us the discipline which is necessary for the stability of
civilization and for continuity of progress. We are realizing through it
that there is a universal standard of justice to which all men,
irrespective of their caste and colour, have their equal claim.

This reign of law in our present Government in India has established
order in this vast land inhabited by peoples different in their races
and customs. It has made it possible for these peoples to come in closer
touch with one another and cultivate a communion of aspiration.

But this desire for a common bond of comradeship among the different
races of India has been the work of the spirit of the West, not that of
the Nation of the West. Wherever in Asia the people have received the
true lesson of the West it is in spite of the Western Nation. Only
because Japan had been able to resist the dominance of this Western
Nation could she acquire the benefit of the Western Civilization in
fullest measure. Though China has been poisoned at the very spring of
her moral and physical life by this Nation, her struggle to receive the
best lessons of the West may yet be successful if not hindered by the
Nation. It was only the other day that Persia woke up from her age-long
sleep at the call of the West to be instantly trampled into stillness by
the Nation. The same phenomenon prevails in this country also, where the
people are hospitable, but the Nation has proved itself to be
otherwise, making an Eastern guest feel humiliated to stand before you
as a member of the humanity of his own motherland.

In India we are suffering from this conflict between the spirit of the
West and the Nation of the West. The benefit of the Western civilization
is doled out to us in a miserly measure by the Nation, which tries to
regulate the degree of nutrition as near the zero-point of vitality as
possible. The portion of education allotted to us is so raggedly
insufficient that it ought to outrage the sense of decency of a Western
humanity. We have seen in these countries how the people are encouraged
and trained and given every facility to fit themselves for the great
movements of commerce and industry spreading over the world, while in
India the only assistance we get is merely to be jeered at by the Nation
for lagging behind. While depriving us of our opportunities and reducing
our education to the minimum required for conducting a foreign
government, this Nation pacifies its conscience by calling us names, by
sedulously giving currency to the arrogant cynicism that the East is
east and the West is west and never the twain shall meet. If we must
believe our schoolmaster in his taunt that, after nearly two centuries
of his tutelage, India not only remains unfit for self-government but
unable to display originality in her intellectual attainments, must we
ascribe it to something in the nature of Western culture and our
inherent incapacity to receive it or to the judicious niggardliness of
the Nation that has taken upon itself the white man's burden of
civilizing the East? That Japanese people have some qualities which we
lack we may admit, but that our intellect is naturally unproductive
compared to theirs we cannot accept even from them whom it is dangerous
for us to contradict.

The truth is that the spirit of conflict and conquest is at the origin
and in the centre of Western nationalism; its basis is not social
co-operation. It has evolved a perfect organization of power, but not
spiritual idealism. It is like the pack of predatory creatures that must
have its victims. With all its heart it cannot bear to see its
hunting-grounds converted into cultivated fields. In fact, these nations
are fighting among themselves for the extension of their victims and
their reserve forests. Therefore the Western Nation acts like a dam to
check the free flow of Western civilization into the country of the
No-Nation. Because this civilization is the civilization of power,
therefore it is exclusive, it is naturally unwilling to open its
sources of power to those whom it has selected for its purposes of
exploitation.

But all the same moral law is the law of humanity, and the exclusive
civilization which thrives upon others who are barred from its benefit
carries its own death-sentence in its moral limitations. The slavery
that it gives rise to unconsciously drains its own love of freedom dry.
The helplessness with which it weighs down its world of victims exerts
its force of gravitation every moment upon the power that creates it.
And the greater part of the world which is being denuded of its
self-sustaining life by the Nation will one day become the most terrible
of all its burdens, ready to drag it down into the bottom of
destruction. Whenever Power removes all checks from its path to make its
career easy, it triumphantly rides into its ultimate crash of death. Its
moral brake becomes slacker every day without its knowing it, and its
slippery path of ease becomes its path of doom.

Of all things in Western civilization, those which this Western Nation
has given us in a most generous measure are law and order. While the
small feeding-bottle of our education is nearly dry, and sanitation
sucks its own thumb in despair, the military organization, the
magisterial offices, the police, the Criminal Investigation Department,
the secret spy system, attain to an abnormal girth in their waists,
occupying every inch of our country. This is to maintain order. But is
not this order merely a negative good? Is it not for giving people's
life greater opportunities for the freedom of development? Its
perfection is the perfection of an egg-shell, whose true value lies in
the security it affords to the chick and its nourishment and not in the
convenience it offers to the person at the breakfast table. Mere
administration is unproductive, it is not creative, not being a living
thing. It is a steam-roller, formidable in its weight and power, having
its uses, but it does not help the soil to become fertile. When after
its enormous toil it comes to offer us its boon of peace we can but
murmur under our breath that "peace is good, but not more so than life,
which is God's own great boon."

On the other hand, our former governments were woefully lacking in many
of the advantages of the modern government. But because those were not
the governments by the Nation, their texture was loosely woven, leaving
big gaps through which our own life sent its threads and imposed its
designs. I am quite sure in those days we had things that were extremely
distasteful to us. But we know that when we walk barefooted upon ground
strewn with gravel, our feet come gradually to adjust themselves to the
caprices of the inhospitable earth; while if the tiniest particle of
gravel finds its lodgment inside our shoes we can never forget and
forgive its intrusion. And these shoes are the government by the
Nation,--it is tight, it regulates our steps with a closed-up system,
within which our feet have only the slightest liberty to make their own
adjustments. Therefore, when you produce your statistics to compare the
number of gravels which our feet had to encounter in former days with
the paucity in the present régime, they hardly touch the real points. It
is not a question of the number of outside obstacles but the comparative
powerlessness of the individual to cope with them. This narrowness of
freedom is an evil which is more radical, not because of its quantity
but because of its nature. And we cannot but acknowledge this paradox,
that while the spirit of the West marches under its banner of freedom,
the Nation of the West forges its iron chains of organization which are
the most relentless and unbreakable that have ever been manufactured in
the whole history of man.

When the humanity of India was not under the government of the
Organization, the elasticity of change was great enough to encourage men
of power and spirit to feel that they had their destinies in their own
hands. The hope of the unexpected was never absent, and a freer play of
imagination, on the part both of the governor and the governed, had its
effect in the making of history. We were not confronted with a future,
which was a dead white wall of granite blocks eternally guarding against
the expression and extension of our own powers, the hopelessness of
which lies in the reason that these powers are becoming atrophied at
their very roots by the scientific process of paralysis. For every
single individual in the country of the No-Nation is completely in the
grip of a whole nation,--whose tireless vigilance, being the vigilance
of a machine, has not the human power to overlook or to discriminate. At
the least pressing of its button the monster organization becomes all
eyes, whose ugly stare of inquisitiveness cannot be avoided by a single
person amongst the immense multitude of the ruled. At the least turn of
its screw, by the fraction of an inch, the grip is tightened to the
point of suffocation around every man, woman and child of a vast
population, for whom no escape is imaginable in their own country, or
even in any country outside their own.

It is the continual and stupendous dead pressure of this inhuman upon
the living human under which the modern world is groaning. Not merely
the subject races, but you who live under the delusion that you are
free, are every day sacrificing your freedom and humanity to this fetich
of nationalism, living in the dense poisonous atmosphere of world-wide
suspicion and greed and panic.

I have seen in Japan the voluntary submission of the whole people to the
trimming of their minds and clipping of their freedom by their
government, which through various educational agencies regulates their
thoughts, manufactures their feelings, becomes suspiciously watchful
when they show signs of inclining toward the spiritual, leading them
through a narrow path not toward what is true but what is necessary for
the complete welding of them into one uniform mass according to its own
recipe. The people accept this all-pervading mental slavery with
cheerfulness and pride because of their nervous desire to turn
themselves into a machine of power, called the Nation, and emulate other
machines in their collective worldliness.

When questioned as to the wisdom of its course the newly converted
fanatic of nationalism answers that "so long as nations are rampant in
this world we have not the option freely to develop our higher humanity.
We must utilize every faculty that we possess to resist the evil by
assuming it ourselves in the fullest degree. For the only brotherhood
possible in the modern world is the brotherhood of hooliganism." The
recognition of the fraternal bond of love between Japan and Russia,
which has lately been celebrated with an immense display of rejoicing in
Japan, was not owing to any sudden recrudescence of the spirit of
Christianity or of Buddhism, but it was a bond established according to
the modern faith in a surer relationship of mutual menace of
bloodshedding. Yes, one cannot but acknowledge that these facts are the
facts of the world of the Nation, and the only moral of it is that all
the peoples of the earth should strain their physical, moral and
intellectual resources to the utmost to defeat one another in the
wrestling match of powerfulness. In the ancient days Sparta paid all
her attention to becoming powerful; she did become so by crippling her
humanity, and died of the amputation.

But it is no consolation to us to know that the weakening of humanity
from which the present age is suffering is not limited to the subject
races, and that its ravages are even more radical because insidious and
voluntary in peoples who are hypnotized into believing that they are
free. This bartering of your higher aspirations of life for profit and
power has been your own free choice, and I leave you there, at the
wreckage of your soul, contemplating your protuberant prosperity. But
will you never be called to answer for organizing the instincts of
self-aggrandizement of whole peoples into perfection and calling it
good? I ask you what disaster has there ever been in the history of man,
in its darkest period, like this terrible disaster of the Nation fixing
its fangs deep into the naked flesh of the world, taking permanent
precautions against its natural relaxation?

You, the people of the West, who have manufactured this abnormality, can
you imagine the desolating despair of this haunted world of suffering
man possessed by the ghastly abstraction of the organizing man? Can you
put yourself into the position of the peoples, who seem to have been
doomed to an eternal damnation of their own humanity, who not only must
suffer continual curtailment of their manhood, but even raise their
voices in pæans of praise for the benignity of a mechanical apparatus in
its interminable parody of providence?

Have you not seen, since the commencement of the existence of the
Nation, that the dread of it has been the one goblin-dread with which
the whole world has been trembling? Wherever there is a dark corner,
there is the suspicion of its secret malevolence; and people live in a
perpetual distrust of its back where it has no eyes. Every sound of a
footstep, every rustle of movement in the neighbourhood, sends a thrill
of terror all around. And this terror is the parent of all that is base
in man's nature. It makes one almost openly unashamed of inhumanity.
Clever lies become matters of self-congratulation. Solemn pledges become
a farce,--laughable for their very solemnity. The Nation, with all its
paraphernalia of power and prosperity, its flags and pious hymns, its
blasphemous prayers in the churches, and the literary mock thunders of
its patriotic bragging, cannot hide the fact that the Nation is the
greatest evil for the Nation, that all its precautions are against it,
and any new birth of its fellow in the world is always followed in its
mind by the dread of a new peril. Its one wish is to trade on the
feebleness of the rest of the world, like some insects that are bred in
the paralysed flesh of victims kept just enough alive to make them
toothsome and nutritious. Therefore it is ready to send its poisonous
fluid into the vitals of the other living peoples, who, not being
nations, are harmless. For this the Nation has had and still has its
richest pasture in Asia. Great China, rich with her ancient wisdom and
social ethics, her discipline of industry and self-control, is like a
whale awakening the lust of spoil in the heart of the Nation. She is
already carrying in her quivering flesh harpoons sent by the unerring
aim of the Nation, the creature of science and selfishness. Her pitiful
attempt to shake off her traditions of humanity, her social ideals, and
spend her last exhausted resources in drilling herself into modern
efficiency, is thwarted at every step by the Nation. It is tightening
its financial ropes round her, trying to drag her up on the shore and
cut her into pieces, and then go and offer public thanksgiving to God
for supporting the one existing evil and shattering the possibility of a
new one. And for all this the Nation has been claiming the gratitude of
history, and all eternity for its exploitation; ordering its band of
praise to be struck up from end to end of the world, declaring itself to
be the salt of the earth, the flower of humanity, the blessing of God
hurled with all His force upon the naked skulls of the world of
No-Nations.

I know what your advice will be. You will say, form yourselves into a
nation, and resist this encroachment of the Nation. But is this the true
advice? that of a man to a man? Why should this be a necessity? I could
well believe you if you had said, Be more good, more just, more true in
your relation to man, control your greed, make your life wholesome in
its simplicity and let your consciousness of the divine in humanity be
more perfect in its expression. But must you say that it is not the
soul, but the machine, which is of the utmost value to ourselves, and
that man's salvation depends upon his disciplining himself into a
perfection of the dead rhythm of wheels and counterwheels? that machine
must be pitted against machine, and nation against nation, in an endless
bull-fight of politics?

You say, these machines will come into an agreement, for their mutual
protection, based upon a conspiracy of fear. But will this federation
of steam-boilers supply you with a soul, a soul which has her conscience
and her God? What is to happen to that larger part of the world where
fear will have no hand in restraining you? Whatever safety they now
enjoy, those countries of No-Nation, from the unbridled license of forge
and hammer and turn-screw, results from the mutual jealousy of the
powers. But when, instead of being numerous separate machines, they
become riveted into one organized gregariousness of gluttony, commercial
and political, what remotest chance of hope will remain for those
others, who have lived and suffered, have loved and worshipped, have
thought deeply and worked with meekness, but whose only crime has been
that they have not organized?

But, you say, "That does not matter, the unfit must go to the wall--they
shall _die_, and this is science."

No, for the sake of your own salvation, I say, they shall _live_, and
this is truth. It is extremely bold of me to say so, but I assert that
man's world is a moral world, not because we blindly agree to believe
it, but because it is so in truth which would be dangerous for us to
ignore. And this moral nature of man cannot be divided into convenient
compartments for its preservation. You cannot secure it for your home
consumption with protective tariff walls, while in foreign parts making
it enormously accommodating in its free trade of license.

Has not this truth already come home to you now, when this cruel war has
driven its claws into the vitals of Europe? when her hoard of wealth is
bursting into smoke and her humanity is shattered into bits on her
battlefields? You ask in amazement what has she done to deserve this?
The answer is, that the West has been systematically petrifying her
moral nature in order to lay a solid foundation for her gigantic
abstractions of efficiency. She has all along been starving the life of
the personal man into that of the professional.

In your mediæval age in Europe, the simple and the natural man, with all
his violent passions and desires, was engaged in trying to find out a
reconciliation in the conflict between the flesh and the spirit. All
through the turbulent career of her vigorous youth the temporal and the
spiritual forces both acted strongly upon her nature, and were moulding
it into completeness of moral personality. Europe owes all her greatness
in humanity to that period of discipline,--the discipline of the man in
his human integrity.

Then came the age of intellect, of science. We all know that intellect
is impersonal. Our life, and our heart, are one with us, but our mind
can be detached from the personal man and then only can it freely move
in its world of thoughts. Our intellect is an ascetic who wears no
clothes, takes no food, knows no sleep, has no wishes, feels no love or
hatred or pity for human limitations, who only reasons, unmoved, through
the vicissitudes of life. It burrows to the roots of things, because it
has no personal concern with the thing itself. The grammarian walks
straight through all poetry and goes to the root of words without
obstruction, because he is not seeking reality, but law. When he finds
the law, he is able to teach people how to master words. This is a
power,--the power which fulfils some special usefulness, some particular
need of man.

Reality is the harmony which gives to the component parts of a thing the
equilibrium of the whole. You break it, and have in your hands the
nomadic atoms fighting against one another, therefore unmeaning. Those
who covet power try to get mastery of these aboriginal fighting
elements, and through some narrow channels force them into some violent
service for some particular needs of man.

This satisfaction of man's needs is a great thing. It gives him freedom
in the material world. It confers on him the benefit of a greater range
of time and space. He can do things in a shorter time and occupies a
larger space with more thoroughness of advantage. Therefore he can
easily outstrip those who live in a world of a slower time and of space
less fully occupied.

This progress of power attains more and more rapidity of pace. And, for
the reason that it is a detached part of man, it soon outruns the
complete humanity. The moral man remains behind, because it has to deal
with the whole reality, not merely with the law of things, which is
impersonal and therefore abstract.

Thus, man with his mental and material power far outgrowing his moral
strength, is like an exaggerated giraffe whose head has suddenly shot up
miles away from the rest of him, making normal communication difficult
to establish. This greedy head, with its huge dental organization, has
been munching all the topmost foliage of the world, but the nourishment
is too late in reaching his digestive organs, and his heart is
suffering from want of blood. Of this present disharmony in man's nature
the West seems to have been blissfully unconscious. The enormity of its
material success has diverted all its attention toward
self-congratulation on its bulk. The optimism of its logic goes on
basing the calculations of its good fortune upon the indefinite
prolongation of its railway lines toward eternity. It is superficial
enough to think that all to-morrows are merely to-days, with the
repeated additions of twenty-four hours. It has no fear of the chasm,
which is opening wider every day, between man's ever-growing storehouses
and the emptiness of his hungry humanity. Logic does not know that,
under the lowest bed of endless strata of wealth and comforts,
earthquakes are being hatched to restore the balance of the moral world,
and one day the gaping gulf of spiritual vacuity will draw into its
bottom the store of things that have their eternal love for the dust.

Man in his fulness is not powerful, but perfect. Therefore, to turn him
into mere power, you have to curtail his soul as much as possible. When
we are fully human, we cannot fly at one another's throats; our
instincts of social life, our traditions of moral ideals stand in the
way. If you want me to take to butchering human beings, you must break
up that wholeness of my humanity through some discipline which makes my
will dead, my thoughts numb, my movements automatic, and then from the
dissolution of the complex personal man will come out that abstraction,
that destructive force, which has no relation to human truth, and
therefore can be easily brutal or mechanical. Take away man from his
natural surroundings, from the fulness of his communal life, with all
its living associations of beauty and love and social obligations, and
you will be able to turn him into so many fragments of a machine for the
production of wealth on a gigantic scale. Turn a tree into a log and it
will burn for you, but it will never bear living flowers and fruit.

This process of dehumanizing has been going on in commerce and politics.
And out of the long birth-throes of mechanical energy has been born this
fully developed apparatus of magnificent power and surprising appetite
which has been christened in the West as the Nation. As I have hinted
before, because of its quality of abstraction it has, with the greatest
ease, gone far ahead of the complete moral man. And having the
conscience of a ghost and the callous perfection of an automaton, it is
causing disasters of which the volcanic dissipations of the youthful
moon would be ashamed to be brought into comparison. As a result, the
suspicion of man for man stings all the limbs of this civilization like
the hairs of the nettle. Each country is casting its net of espionage
into the slimy bottom of the others, fishing for their secrets, the
treacherous secrets which brew in the oozy depths of diplomacy. And what
is their secret service but the nation's underground trade in
kidnapping, murder and treachery and all the ugly crimes bred in the
depth of rottenness? Because each nation has its own history of thieving
and lies and broken faith, therefore there can only flourish
international suspicion and jealousy, and international moral shame
becomes anæmic to a degree of ludicrousness. The nation's bagpipe of
righteous indignation has so often changed its tune according to the
variation of time and to the altered groupings of the alliances of
diplomacy, that it can be enjoyed with amusement as the variety
performance of the political music hall.

I am just coming from my visit to Japan, where I exhorted this young
nation to take its stand upon the higher ideals of humanity and never
to follow the West in its acceptance of the organized selfishness of
Nationalism as its religion, never to gloat upon the feebleness of its
neighbours, never to be unscrupulous in its behaviour to the weak, where
it can be gloriously mean with impunity, while turning its right cheek
of brighter humanity for the kiss of admiration to those who have the
power to deal it a blow. Some of the newspapers praised my utterances
for their poetical qualities, while adding with a leer that it was the
poetry of a defeated people. I felt they were right. Japan had been
taught in a modern school the lesson how to become powerful. The
schooling is done and she must enjoy the fruits of her lessons. The West
in the voice of her thundering cannon had said at the door of Japan, Let
there be a nation--and there was a Nation. And now that it _has_ come
into existence, why do you not feel in your heart of hearts a pure
feeling of gladness and say that it is good? Why is it that I saw in an
English paper an expression of bitterness at Japan's boasting of her
superiority of civilization--the thing that the British, along with
other nations, has been carrying on for ages without blushing? Because
the idealism of selfishness must keep itself drunk with a continual dose
of self-laudation. But the same vices which seem so natural and
innocuous in its own life make it surprised and angry at their
unpleasantness when seen in other nations. Therefore, when you see the
Japanese nation, created in your own image, launched in its career of
national boastfulness you shake your head and say, it is not good. Has
it not been one of the causes that raise the cry on these shores for
preparedness to meet one more power of evil with a greater power of
injury? Japan protests that she has her _bushido_, that she can never be
treacherous to America, to whom she owes her gratitude. But you find it
difficult to believe her,--for the wisdom of the Nation is not in its
faith in humanity but in its complete distrust. You say to yourself that
it is not with Japan of the _bushido_, the Japan of the moral ideals,
that you have to deal--it is with the abstraction of the popular
selfishness, it is with the Nation; and Nation can only trust Nation
where their interests coalesce, or at least do not conflict. In fact
your instinct tells you that the advent of another people into the arena
of nationality makes another addition to the evil which contradicts all
that is highest in Man and proves by its success that unscrupulousness
is the way to prosperity,--and goodness is good for the weak and God is
the only remaining consolation of the defeated.

Yes, this is the logic of the Nation. And it will never heed the voice
of truth and goodness. It will go on in its ring-dance of moral
corruption, linking steel unto steel, and machine unto machine;
trampling under its tread all the sweet flowers of simple faith and the
living ideals of man.

But we delude ourselves into thinking that humanity in the modern days
is more to the front than ever before. The reason of this self-delusion
is because man is served with the necessaries of life in greater
profusion, and his physical ills are being alleviated with more
efficacy. But the chief part of this is done, not by moral sacrifice,
but by intellectual power. In quantity it is great, but it springs from
the surface and spreads over the surface. Knowledge and efficiency are
powerful in their outward effect, but they are the servants of man, not
the man himself. Their service is like the service in a hotel, where it
is elaborate, but the host is absent; it is more convenient than
hospitable.

Therefore we must not forget that the scientific organizations vastly
spreading in all directions are strengthening our power, but not our
humanity. With the growth of power the cult of the self-worship of the
Nation grows in ascendancy; and the individual willingly allows the
Nation to take donkey-rides upon his back; and there happens the anomaly
which must have such disastrous effects, that the individual worships
with all sacrifices a god which is morally much inferior to himself.
This could never have been possible if the god had been as real as the
individual.

Let me give an illustration of this in point. In some parts of India it
has been enjoined as an act of great piety for a widow to go without
food and water on a particular day every fortnight. This often leads to
cruelty, unmeaning and inhuman. And yet men are not by nature cruel to
such a degree. But this piety being a mere unreal abstraction completely
deadens the moral sense of the individual, just as the man, who would
not hurt an animal unnecessarily, would cause horrible suffering to a
large number of innocent creatures when he drugs his feelings with the
abstract idea of "sport." Because these ideas are the creations of our
intellect, because they are logical classifications, therefore they can
so easily hide in their mist the personal man.

And the idea of the Nation is one of the most powerful anæsthetics that
man has invented. Under the influence of its fumes the whole people can
carry out its systematic programme of the most virulent self-seeking
without being in the least aware of its moral perversion,--in fact
feeling dangerously resentful if it is pointed out.

But can this go on indefinitely? continually producing barrenness of
moral insensibility upon a large tract of our living nature? Can it
escape its nemesis for ever? Has this giant power of mechanical
organization no limit in this world against which it may shatter itself
all the more completely because of its terrible strength and velocity?
Do you believe that evil can be permanently kept in check by competition
with evil, and that conference of prudence can keep the devil chained in
its makeshift cage of mutual agreement?

This European war of Nations is the war of retribution. Man, the person,
must protest for his very life against the heaping up of things where
there should be the heart, and systems and policies where there should
flow living human relationship. The time has come when, for the sake of
the whole outraged world, Europe should fully know in her own person the
terrible absurdity of the thing called the Nation.

The Nation has thriven long upon mutilated humanity. Men, the fairest
creations of God, came out of the National manufactory in huge numbers
as war-making and money-making puppets, ludicrously vain of their
pitiful perfection of mechanism. Human society grew more and more into a
marionette show of politicians, soldiers, manufacturers and bureaucrats,
pulled by wire arrangements of wonderful efficiency.

But the apotheosis of selfishness can never make its interminable breed
of hatred and greed, fear and hypocrisy, suspicion and tyranny, an end
in themselves. These monsters grow into huge shapes but never into
harmony. And this Nation may grow on to an unimaginable corpulence, not
of a living body, but of steel and steam and office buildings, till its
deformity can contain no longer its ugly voluminousness,--till it begins
to crack and gape, breathe gas and fire in gasps, and its death-rattles
sound in cannon roars. In this war the death-throes of the Nation have
commenced. Suddenly, all its mechanism going mad, it has begun the dance
of the Furies, shattering its own limbs, scattering them into the dust.
It is the fifth act of the tragedy of the unreal.

Those who have any faith in Man cannot but fervently hope that the
tyranny of the Nation will not be restored to all its former teeth and
claws, to its far-reaching iron arms and its immense inner cavity, all
stomach and no heart; that man will have his new birth, in the freedom
of his individuality, from the enveloping vagueness of abstraction.

The veil has been raised, and in this frightful war the West has stood
face to face with her own creation, to which she had offered her soul.
She must know what it truly is.

She had never let herself suspect what slow decay and decomposition were
secretly going on in her moral nature, which often broke out in
doctrines of scepticism, but still oftener and in still more dangerously
subtle manner showed itself in her unconsciousness of the mutilation and
insult that she had been inflicting upon a vast part of the world. Now
she must know the truth nearer home.

And then there will come from her own children those who will break
themselves free from the slavery of this illusion, this perversion of
brotherhood founded upon self-seeking, those who will own themselves as
God's children and as no bond-slaves of machinery, which turns souls
into commodities and life into compartments, which, with its iron
claws, scratches out the heart of the world and knows not what it has
done.

And we of no nations of the world, whose heads have been bowed to the
dust, will know that this dust is more sacred than the bricks which
build the pride of power. For this dust is fertile of life, and of
beauty and worship. We shall thank God that we were made to wait in
silence through the night of despair, had to bear the insult of the
proud and the strong man's burden, yet all through it, though our hearts
quaked with doubt and fear, never could we blindly believe in the
salvation which machinery offered to man, but we held fast to our trust
in God and the truth of the human soul. And we can still cherish the
hope that, when power becomes ashamed to occupy its throne and is ready
to make way for love, when the morning comes for cleansing the
blood-stained steps of the Nation along the highroad of humanity, we
shall be called upon to bring our own vessel of sacred water--the water
of worship--to sweeten the history of man into purity, and with its
sprinkling make the trampled dust of the centuries blessed with
fruitfulness.




NATIONALISM IN JAPAN


I

The worst form of bondage is the bondage of dejection, which keeps men
hopelessly chained in loss of faith in themselves. We have been
repeatedly told, with some justification, that Asia lives in the
past,--it is like a rich mausoleum which displays all its magnificence
in trying to immortalize the dead. It was said of Asia that it could
never move in the path of progress, its face was so inevitably turned
backwards. We accepted this accusation, and came to believe it. In
India, I know, a large section of our educated community, grown tired of
feeling the humiliation of this charge against us, is trying all its
resources of self-deception to turn it into a matter of boasting. But
boasting is only a masked shame, it does not truly believe in itself.

When things stood still like this, and we in Asia hypnotized ourselves
into the belief that it could never by any possibility be otherwise,
Japan rose from her dreams, and in giant strides left centuries of
inaction behind, overtaking the present time in its foremost
achievement. This has broken the spell under which we lay in torpor for
ages, taking it to be the normal condition of certain races living in
certain geographical limits. We forgot that in Asia great kingdoms were
founded, philosophy, science, arts and literatures flourished, and all
the great religions of the world had their cradles. Therefore it cannot
be said that there is anything inherent in the soil and climate of Asia
to produce mental inactivity and to atrophy the faculties which impel
men to go forward. For centuries we did hold torches of civilization in
the East when the West slumbered in darkness, and that could never be
the sign of sluggish mind or narrowness of vision.

Then fell the darkness of night upon all the lands of the East. The
current of time seemed to stop at once, and Asia ceased to take any new
food, feeding upon its own past, which is really feeding upon itself.
The stillness seemed like death, and the great voice was silenced which
sent forth messages of eternal truth that have saved man's life from
pollution for generations, like the ocean of air that keeps the earth
sweet, ever cleansing its impurities.

But life has its sleep, its periods of inactivity, when it loses its
movements, takes no new food, living upon its past storage. Then it
grows helpless, its muscles relaxed, and it easily lends itself to be
jeered at for its stupor. In the rhythm of life, pauses there must be
for the renewal of life. Life in its activity is ever spending itself,
burning all its fuel. This extravagance cannot go on indefinitely, but
is always followed by a passive stage, when all expenditure is stopped
and all adventures abandoned in favour of rest and slow recuperation.

The tendency of mind is economical, it loves to form habits and move in
grooves which save it the trouble of thinking anew at each of its steps.
Ideals once formed make the mind lazy. It becomes afraid to risk its
acquisitions in fresh endeavours. It tries to enjoy complete security by
shutting up its belongings behind fortifications of habits. But this is
really shutting oneself up from the fullest enjoyment of one's own
possessions. It is miserliness. The living ideals must not lose their
touch with the growing and changing life. Their real freedom is not
within the boundaries of security, but in the highroad of adventures,
full of the risk of new experiences.

One morning the whole world looked up in surprise when Japan broke
through her walls of old habits in a night and came out triumphant. It
was done in such an incredibly short time that it seemed like a change
of dress and not like the building up of a new structure. She showed the
confident strength of maturity, and the freshness and infinite
potentiality of new life at the same moment. The fear was entertained
that it was a mere freak of history, a child's game of Time, the blowing
up of a soap-bubble, perfect in its rondure and colouring, hollow in its
heart and without substance. But Japan has proved conclusively that this
sudden revealment of her power is not a short-lived wonder, a chance
product of time and tide, thrown up from the depth of obscurity to be
swept away the next moment into the sea of oblivion.

The truth is that Japan is old and new at the same time. She has her
legacy of ancient culture from the East,--the culture that enjoins man
to look for his true wealth and power in his inner soul, the culture
that gives self-possession in the face of loss and danger,
self-sacrifice without counting the cost or hoping for gain, defiance
of death, acceptance of countless social obligations that we owe to men
as social beings. In a word, modern Japan has come out of the immemorial
East like a lotus blossoming in easy grace, all the while keeping its
firm hold upon the profound depth from which it has sprung.

And Japan, the child of the Ancient East, has also fearlessly claimed
all the gifts of the modern age for herself. She has shown her bold
spirit in breaking through the confinements of habits, useless
accumulations of the lazy mind, which seeks safety in its thrift and its
locks and keys. Thus she has come in contact with the living time and
has accepted with eagerness and aptitude the responsibilities of modern
civilization.

This it is which has given heart to the rest of Asia. We have seen that
the life and the strength are there in us, only the dead crust has to be
removed. We have seen that taking shelter in the dead is death itself,
and only taking all the risk of life to the fullest extent is living.

I, for myself, cannot believe that Japan has become what she is by
imitating the West. We cannot imitate life, we cannot simulate strength
for long, nay, what is more, a mere imitation is a source of weakness.
For it hampers our true nature, it is always in our way. It is like
dressing our skeleton with another man's skin, giving rise to eternal
feuds between the skin and the bones at every movement.

The real truth is that science is not man's nature, it is mere knowledge
and training. By knowing the laws of the material universe you do not
change your deeper humanity. You can borrow knowledge from others, but
you cannot borrow temperament.

But at the imitative stage of our schooling we cannot distinguish
between the essential and the non-essential, between what is
transferable and what is not. It is something like the faith of the
primitive mind in the magical properties of the accidents of outward
forms which accompany some real truth. We are afraid of leaving out
something valuable and efficacious by not swallowing the husk with the
kernel. But while our greed delights in wholesale appropriation, it is
the function of our vital nature to assimilate, which is the only true
appropriation for a living organism. Where there is life it is sure to
assert itself by its choice of acceptance and refusal according to its
constitutional necessity. The living organism does not allow itself to
grow into its food, it changes its food into its own body. And only thus
can it grow strong and not by mere accumulation, or by giving up its
personal identity.

Japan has imported her food from the West, but not her vital nature.
Japan cannot altogether lose and merge herself in the scientific
paraphernalia she has acquired from the West and be turned into a mere
borrowed machine. She has her own soul, which must assert itself over
all her requirements. That she is capable of doing so, and that the
process of assimilation is going on, have been amply proved by the signs
of vigorous health that she exhibits. And I earnestly hope that Japan
may never lose her faith in her own soul, in the mere pride of her
foreign acquisition. For that pride itself is a humiliation, ultimately
leading to poverty and weakness. It is the pride of the fop who sets
more store on his new headdress than on his head itself.

The whole world waits to see what this great Eastern nation is going to
do with the opportunities and responsibilities she has accepted from the
hands of the modern time. If it be a mere reproduction of the West, then
the great expectation she has raised will remain unfulfilled. For there
are grave questions that the Western civilization has presented before
the world but not completely answered. The conflict between the
individual and the state, labour and capital, the man and the woman; the
conflict between the greed of material gain and the spiritual life of
man, the organized selfishness of nations and the higher ideals of
humanity; the conflict between all the ugly complexities inseparable
from giant organizations of commerce and state and the natural instincts
of man crying for simplicity and beauty and fulness of leisure,--all
these have to be brought to a harmony in a manner not yet dreamt of.

We have seen this great stream of civilization choking itself from
débris carried by its innumerable channels. We have seen that with all
its vaunted love of humanity it has proved itself the greatest menace to
Man, far worse than the sudden outbursts of nomadic barbarism from which
men suffered in the early ages of history. We have seen that, in spite
of its boasted love of freedom, it has produced worse forms of slavery
than ever were current in earlier societies,--slavery whose chains are
unbreakable, either because they are unseen, or because they assume the
names and appearance of freedom. We have seen, under the spell of its
gigantic sordidness, man losing faith in all the heroic ideals of life
which have made him great.

Therefore you cannot with a light heart accept the modern civilization
with all its tendencies, methods and structures, and dream that they are
inevitable. You must apply your Eastern mind, your spiritual strength,
your love of simplicity, your recognition of social obligation, in order
to cut out a new path for this great unwieldy car of progress, shrieking
out its loud discords as it runs. You must minimize the immense
sacrifice of man's life and freedom that it claims in its every
movement. For generations you have felt and thought and worked, have
enjoyed and worshipped in your own special manner; and this cannot be
cast off like old clothes. It is in your blood, in the marrow of your
bones, in the texture of your flesh, in the tissue of your brains; and
it must modify everything you lay your hands upon, without your knowing,
even against your wishes. Once you did solve the problems of man to your
own satisfaction, you had your philosophy of life and evolved your own
art of living. All this you must apply to the present situation, and out
of it will arise a new creation and not a mere repetition, a creation
which the soul of your people will own for itself and proudly offer to
the world as its tribute to the welfare of man. Of all countries in
Asia, here in Japan you have the freedom to use the materials you have
gathered from the West according to your genius and your need. Therefore
your responsibility is all the greater, for in your voice Asia shall
answer the questions that Europe has submitted to the conference of Man.
In your land the experiments will be carried on by which the East will
change the aspects of modern civilization, infusing life in it where it
is a machine, substituting the human heart for cold expediency, not
caring so much for power and success as for harmonious and living
growth, for truth and beauty.

I cannot but bring to your mind those days when the whole of Eastern
Asia from Burma to Japan was united with India in the closest tie of
friendship, the only natural tie which can exist between nations. There
was a living communication of hearts, a nervous system evolved through
which messages ran between us about the deepest needs of humanity. We
did not stand in fear of each other, we had not to arm ourselves to keep
each other in check; our relation was not that of self-interest, of
exploration and spoliation of each other's pockets; ideas and ideals
were exchanged, gifts of the highest love were offered and taken; no
difference of languages and customs hindered us in approaching each
other heart to heart; no pride of race or insolent consciousness of
superiority, physical or mental, marred our relation; our arts and
literatures put forth new leaves and flowers under the influence of this
sunlight of united hearts; and races belonging to different lands and
languages and histories acknowledged the highest unity of man and the
deepest bond of love. May we not also remember that in those days of
peace and goodwill, of men uniting for those supreme ends of life, your
nature laid by for itself the balm of immortality which has helped your
people to be born again in a new age, to be able to survive its old
outworn structures and take on a new young body, to come out unscathed
from the shock of the most wonderful revolution that the world has ever
seen?

The political civilization which has sprung up from the soil of Europe
and is overrunning the whole world, like some prolific weed, is based
upon exclusiveness. It is always watchful to keep the aliens at bay or
to exterminate them. It is carnivorous and cannibalistic in its
tendencies, it feeds upon the resources of other peoples and tries to
swallow their whole future. It is always afraid of other races achieving
eminence, naming it as a peril, and tries to thwart all symptoms of
greatness outside its own boundaries, forcing down races of men who are
weaker, to be eternally fixed in their weakness. Before this political
civilization came to its power and opened its hungry jaws wide enough to
gulp down great continents of the earth, we had wars, pillages, changes
of monarchy and consequent miseries, but never such a sight of fearful
and hopeless voracity, such wholesale feeding of nation upon nation,
such huge machines for turning great portions of the earth into
mince-meat, never such terrible jealousies with all their ugly teeth and
claws ready for tearing open each other's vitals. This political
civilization is scientific, not human. It is powerful because it
concentrates all its forces upon one purpose, like a millionaire
acquiring money at the cost of his soul. It betrays its trust, it weaves
its meshes of lies without shame, it enshrines gigantic idols of greed
in its temples, taking great pride in the costly ceremonials of its
worship, calling this patriotism. And it can be safely prophesied that
this cannot go on, for there is a moral law in this world which has its
application both to individuals and to organized bodies of men. You
cannot go on violating these laws in the name of your nation, yet enjoy
their advantage as individuals. This public sapping of ethical ideals
slowly reacts upon each member of society, gradually breeding weakness,
where it is not seen, and causing that cynical distrust of all things
sacred in human nature, which is the true symptom of senility. You must
keep in mind that this political civilization, this creed of national
patriotism, has not been given a long trial. The lamp of ancient Greece
is extinct in the land where it was first lighted, the power of Rome
lies dead and buried under the ruins of its vast empire. But the
civilization, whose basis is society and the spiritual ideal of man, is
still a living thing in China and in India. Though it may look feeble
and small, judged by the standard of the mechanical power of modern
days, yet like small seeds it still contains life and will sprout and
grow, and spread its beneficent branches, producing flowers and fruits
when its time comes and showers of grace descend upon it from heaven.
But ruins of sky-scrapers of power and broken machinery of greed, even
God's rain is powerless to raise up again; for they were not of life,
but went against life as a whole,--they are relics of the rebellion that
shattered itself to pieces against the eternal.

But the charge is brought against us that the ideals we cherish in the
East are static, that they have not the impetus in them to move, to open
out new vistas of knowledge and power, that the systems of philosophy
which are the mainstays of the time-worn civilizations of the East
despise all outward proofs, remaining stolidly satisfied in their
subjective certainty. This proves that when our knowledge is vague we
are apt to accuse of vagueness our object of knowledge itself. To a
Western observer our civilization appears as all metaphysics, as to a
deaf man piano-playing appears to be mere movements of fingers and no
music. He cannot think that we have found some deep basis of reality
upon which we have built our institutions.

Unfortunately all proofs of reality are in realization. The reality of
the scene before you depends only upon the fact that you can see, and it
is difficult for us to prove to an unbeliever that our civilization is
not a nebulous system of abstract speculations, that it has achieved
something which is a positive truth,--a truth that can give man's heart
its shelter and sustenance. It has evolved an inner sense,--a sense of
vision, the vision of the infinite reality in all finite things.

But he says, "You do not make any progress, there is no movement in
you." I ask him, "How do you know it? You have to judge progress
according to its aim. A railway train makes its progress towards the
terminus station,--it is movement. But a full-grown tree has no definite
movement of that kind, its progress is the inward progress of life. It
lives, with its aspiration towards light tingling in its leaves and
creeping in its silent sap."

We also have lived for centuries, we still live, and we have our
aspiration for a reality that has no end to its realization,--a reality
that goes beyond death, giving it a meaning, that rises above all evils
of life, bringing its peace and purity, its cheerful renunciation of
self. The product of this inner life is a living product. It will be
needed when the youth returns home weary and dust-laden, when the
soldier is wounded, when the wealth is squandered away and pride is
humbled, when man's heart cries for truth in the immensity of facts and
harmony in the contradiction of tendencies. Its value is not in its
multiplication of materials, but in its spiritual fulfilment.

There are things that cannot wait. You have to rush and run and march if
you must fight or take the best place in the market. You strain your
nerves and are on the alert when you chase opportunities that are always
on the wing. But there are ideals which do not play hide-and-seek with
our life; they slowly grow from seed to flower, from flower to fruit;
they require infinite space and heaven's light to mature, and the fruits
that they produce can survive years of insult and neglect. The East with
her ideals, in whose bosom are stored the ages of sunlight and silence
of stars, can patiently wait till the West, hurrying after the
expedient, loses breath and stops. Europe, while busily speeding to her
engagements, disdainfully casts her glance from her carriage window at
the reaper reaping his harvest in the field, and in her intoxication of
speed cannot but think him as slow and ever receding backwards. But the
speed comes to its end, the engagement loses its meaning and the hungry
heart clamours for food, till at last she comes to the lowly reaper
reaping his harvest in the sun. For if the office cannot wait, or the
buying and selling, or the craving for excitement, love waits and
beauty and the wisdom of suffering and the fruits of patient devotion
and reverent meekness of simple faith. And thus shall wait the East till
her time comes.

I must not hesitate to acknowledge where Europe is great, for great she
is without doubt. We cannot help loving her with all our heart, and
paying her the best homage of our admiration,--the Europe who, in her
literature and art, pours out an inexhaustible cascade of beauty and
truth fertilizing all countries and all time; the Europe who, with a
mind which is titanic in its untiring power, is sweeping the height and
the depth of the universe, winning her homage of knowledge from the
infinitely great and the infinitely small, applying all the resources of
her great intellect and heart in healing the sick and alleviating those
miseries of man which up till now we were contented to accept in a
spirit of hopeless resignation; the Europe who is making the earth yield
more fruit than seemed possible, coaxing and compelling the great forces
of nature into man's service. Such true greatness must have its motive
power in spiritual strength. For only the spirit of man can defy all
limitations, have faith in its ultimate success, throw its search-light
beyond the immediate and the apparent, gladly suffer martyrdom for ends
which cannot be achieved in its lifetime and accept failure without
acknowledging defeat. In the heart of Europe runs the purest stream of
human love, of love of justice, of spirit of self-sacrifice for higher
ideals. The Christian culture of centuries has sunk deep in her life's
core. In Europe we have seen noble minds who have ever stood up for the
rights of man irrespective of colour and creed; who have braved calumny
and insult from their own people in fighting for humanity's cause and
raising their voices against the mad orgies of militarism, against the
rage for brutal retaliation or rapacity that sometimes takes possession
of a whole people; who are always ready to make reparation for wrongs
done in the past by their own nations and vainly attempt to stem the
tide of cowardly injustice that flows unchecked because the resistance
is weak and innocuous on the part of the injured. There are these
knight-errants of modern Europe who have not lost their faith in the
disinterested love of freedom, in the ideals which own no geographical
boundaries or national self-seeking. These are there to prove that the
fountainhead of the water of everlasting life has not run dry in Europe,
and from thence she will have her rebirth time after time. Only there,
where Europe is too consciously busy in building up her power, defying
her deeper nature and mocking it, she is heaping up her iniquities to
the sky, crying for God's vengeance and spreading the infection of
ugliness, physical and moral, over the face of the earth with her
heartless commerce heedlessly outraging man's sense of the beautiful and
the good. Europe is supremely good in her beneficence where her face is
turned to all humanity; and Europe is supremely evil in her maleficent
aspect where her face is turned only upon her own interest, using all
her power of greatness for ends which are against the infinite and the
eternal in Man.

Eastern Asia has been pursuing its own path, evolving its own
civilization, which was not political but social, not predatory and
mechanically efficient but spiritual and based upon all the varied and
deeper relations of humanity. The solutions of the life problems of
peoples were thought out in seclusion and carried out behind the
security of aloofness, where all the dynastic changes and foreign
invasions hardly touched them. But now we are overtaken by the outside
world, our seclusion is lost for ever. Yet this we must not regret, as a
plant should never regret when the obscurity of its seed-time is
broken. Now the time has come when we must make the world problem our
own problem; we must bring the spirit of our civilization into harmony
with the history of all nations of the earth; we must not, in foolish
pride, still keep ourselves fast within the shell of the seed and the
crust of the earth which protected and nourished our ideals; for these,
the shell and the crust, were meant to be broken, so that life may
spring up in all its vigour and beauty, bringing its offerings to the
world in open light.

In this task of breaking the barrier and facing the world Japan has come
out the first in the East. She has infused hope in the heart of all
Asia. This hope provides the hidden fire which is needed for all works
of creation. Asia now feels that she must prove her life by producing
living work, she must not lie passively dormant, or feebly imitate the
West, in the infatuation of fear or flattery. For this we offer our
thanks to this Land of the Rising Sun and solemnly ask her to remember
that she has the mission of the East to fulfil. She must infuse the sap
of a fuller humanity into the heart of modern civilization. She must
never allow it to get choked with the noxious undergrowth, but lead it
up towards light and freedom, towards the pure air and broad space,
where it can receive, in the dawn of its day and the darkness of its
night, heaven's inspiration. Let the greatness of her ideals become
visible to all men like her snow-crowned Fuji rising from the heart of
the country into the region of the infinite, supremely distinct from its
surroundings, beautiful like a maiden in its magnificent sweep of curve,
yet firm and strong and serenely majestic.


II

I have travelled in many countries and have met with men of all classes,
but never in my travels did I feel the presence of the human so
distinctly as in this land. In other great countries signs of man's
power loomed large, and I saw vast organizations which showed efficiency
in all their features. There, display and extravagance, in dress, in
furniture, in costly entertainments, are startling. They seem to push
you back into a corner, like a poor intruder at a feast; they are apt to
make you envious, or take your breath away with amazement. There, you do
not feel man as supreme; you are hurled against a stupendousness of
things that alienates. But in Japan it is not the display of power, or
wealth, that is the predominating element. You see everywhere emblems of
love and admiration, and not mostly of ambition and greed. You see a
people whose heart has come out and scattered itself in profusion in its
commonest utensils of everyday life, in its social institutions, in its
manners, which are carefully perfect, and in its dealings with things
which are not only deft but graceful in every movement.

What has impressed me most in this country is the conviction that you
have realized nature's secrets, not by methods of analytical knowledge,
but by sympathy. You have known her language of lines, and music of
colours, the symmetry in her irregularities, and the cadence in her
freedom of movements; you have seen how she leads her immense crowds of
things yet avoids all frictions; how the very conflicts in her creations
break out in dance and music; how her exuberance has the aspect of the
fulness of self-abandonment, and not a mere dissipation of display. You
have discovered that nature reserves her power in forms of beauty; and
it is this beauty which, like a mother, nourishes all the giant forces
at her breast, keeping them in active vigour, yet in repose. You have
known that energies of nature save themselves from wearing out by the
rhythm of a perfect grace, and that she with the tenderness of her
curved lines takes away fatigue from the world's muscles. I have felt
that you have been able to assimilate these secrets into your life, and
the truth which lies in the beauty of all things has passed into your
souls. A mere knowledge of things can be had in a short enough time, but
their spirit can only be acquired by centuries of training and
self-control. Dominating nature from outside is a much simpler thing
than making her your own in love's delight, which is a work of true
genius. Your race has shown that genius, not by acquirement, but by
creation; not by display of things, but by manifestation of its own
inner being. This creative power there is in all nations, and it is ever
active in getting hold of men's natures and giving them a form according
to its ideals. But here, in Japan, it seems to have achieved its
success, and deeply sunk into the minds of all men, and permeated their
muscles and nerves. Your instincts have become true, your senses keen,
and your hands have acquired natural skill. The genius of Europe has
given her people the power of organization, which has specially made
itself manifest in politics and commerce and in co-ordinating scientific
knowledge. The genius of Japan has given you the vision of beauty in
nature and the power of realizing it in your life.

All particular civilization is the interpretation of particular human
experience. Europe seems to have felt emphatically the conflict of
things in the universe, which can only be brought under control by
conquest. Therefore she is ever ready for fight, and the best portion of
her attention is occupied in organizing forces. But Japan has felt, in
her world, the touch of some presence, which has evoked in her soul a
feeling of reverent adoration. She does not boast of her mastery of
nature, but to her she brings, with infinite care and joy, her offerings
of love. Her relationship with the world is the deeper relationship of
heart. This spiritual bond of love she has established with the hills of
her country, with the sea and the streams, with the forests in all their
flowery moods and varied physiognomy of branches; she has taken into her
heart all the rustling whispers and sighing of the woodlands and sobbing
of the waves; the sun and the moon she has studied in all the
modulations of their lights and shades, and she is glad to close her
shops to greet the seasons in her orchards and gardens and cornfields.
This opening of the heart to the soul of the world is not confined to a
section of your privileged classes, it is not the forced product of
exotic culture, but it belongs to all your men and women of all
conditions. This experience of your soul, in meeting a personality in
the heart of the world, has been embodied in your civilization. It is a
civilization of human relationship. Your duty towards your state has
naturally assumed the character of filial duty, your nation becoming one
family with your Emperor as its head. Your national unity has not been
evolved from the comradeship of arms for defensive and offensive
purpose, or from partnership in raiding adventures, dividing among each
member the danger and spoils of robbery. It is not an outcome of the
necessity of organization for some ulterior purpose, but it is an
extension of the family and the obligations of the heart in a wide field
of space and time. The ideal of "maitri" is at the bottom of your
culture,--"maitri" with men and "maitri" with Nature. And the true
expression of this love is in the language of beauty, which is so
abundantly universal in this land. This is the reason why a stranger,
like myself, instead of feeling envy or humiliation before these
manifestations of beauty, these creations of love, feels a readiness to
participate in the joy and glory of such revealment of the human heart.

And this has made me all the more apprehensive of the change which
threatens Japanese civilization, as something like a menace to one's own
person. For the huge heterogeneity of the modern age, whose only common
bond is usefulness, is nowhere so pitifully exposed against the dignity
and hidden power of reticent beauty as in Japan.

But the danger lies in this, that organized ugliness storms the mind and
carries the day by its mass, by its aggressive persistence, by its power
of mockery directed against the deeper sentiments of heart. Its harsh
obtrusiveness makes it forcibly visible to us, overcoming our
senses,--and we bring sacrifices to its altar, as does a savage to the
fetich which appears powerful because of its hideousness. Therefore its
rivalry with things that are modest and profound and have the subtle
delicacy of life is to be dreaded.

I am quite sure that there are men in your country who are not in
sympathy with your inherited ideals; whose object is to gain, and not
to grow. They are loud in their boast that they have modernized Japan.
While I agree with them so far as to say that the spirit of the race
should harmonize with the spirit of the time, I must warn them that
modernizing is a mere affectation of modernism, just as affectation of
poesy is poetizing. It is nothing but mimicry, only affectation is
louder than the original, and it is too literal. One must bear in mind
that those who have the true modern spirit need not modernize, just as
those who are truly brave are not braggarts. Modernism is not in the
dress of the Europeans; or in the hideous structures, where their
children are interned when they take their lessons; or in the square
houses with flat, straight wall-surfaces, pierced with parallel lines of
windows, where these people are caged in their lifetime; certainly
modernism is not in their ladies' bonnets, carrying on them loads of
incongruities. These are not modern, but merely European. True modernism
is freedom of mind, not slavery of taste. It is independence of thought
and action, not tutelage under European schoolmasters. It is science,
but not its wrong application in life,--a mere imitation of our science
teachers who reduce it into a superstition, absurdly invoking its aid
for all impossible purposes.

Life based upon mere science is attractive to some men, because it has
all the characteristics of sport; it feigns seriousness, but is not
profound. When you go a-hunting, the less pity you have the better; for
your one object is to chase the game and kill it, to feel that you are
the greater animal, that your method of destruction is thorough and
scientific. And the life of science is that superficial life. It pursues
success with skill and thoroughness, and takes no account of the higher
nature of man. But those whose minds are crude enough to plan their
lives upon the supposition that man is merely a hunter and his paradise
the paradise of sportsmen will be rudely awakened in the midst of their
trophies of skeletons and skulls.

I do not for a moment suggest that Japan should be unmindful of
acquiring modern weapons of self-protection. But this should never be
allowed to go beyond her instinct of self-preservation. She must know
that the real power is not in the weapons themselves, but in the man who
wields those weapons; and when he, in his eagerness for power,
multiplies his weapons at the cost of his own soul, then it is he who
is in even greater danger than his enemies.

Things that are living are so easily hurt; therefore they require
protection. In nature, life protects itself within its coverings, which
are built with life's own material. Therefore they are in harmony with
life's growth, or else when the time comes they easily give way and are
forgotten. The living man has his true protection in his spiritual
ideals, which have their vital connection with his life and grow with
his growth. But, unfortunately, all his armour is not living,--some of
it is made of steel, inert and mechanical. Therefore, while making use
of it, man has to be careful to protect himself from its tyranny. If he
is weak enough to grow smaller to fit himself to his covering, then it
becomes a process of gradual suicide by shrinkage of the soul. And Japan
must have a firm faith in the moral law of existence to be able to
assert to herself that the Western nations are following that path of
suicide, where they are smothering their humanity under the immense
weight of organizations in order to keep themselves in power and hold
others in subjection.

What is dangerous for Japan is, not the imitation of the outer features
of the West, but the acceptance of the motive force of the Western
nationalism as her own. Her social ideals are already showing signs of
defeat at the hands of politics. I can see her motto, taken from
science, "Survival of the Fittest," writ large at the entrance of her
present-day history--the motto whose meaning is, "Help yourself, and
never heed what it costs to others"; the motto of the blind man who only
believes in what he can touch, because he cannot see. But those who can
see know that men are so closely knit that when you strike others the
blow comes back to yourself. The moral law, which is the greatest
discovery of man, is the discovery of this wonderful truth, that man
becomes all the truer the more he realizes himself in others. This truth
has not only a subjective value, but is manifested in every department
of our life. And nations who sedulously cultivate moral blindness as the
cult of patriotism will end their existence in a sudden and violent
death. In past ages we had foreign invasions, but they never touched the
soul of the people deeply. They were merely the outcome of individual
ambitions. The people themselves, being free from the responsibilities
of the baser and more heinous side of those adventures, had all the
advantage of the heroic and the human disciplines derived from them.
This developed their unflinching loyalty, their single-minded devotion
to the obligations of honour, their power of complete self-surrender and
fearless acceptance of death and danger. Therefore the ideals, whose
seats were in the hearts of the people, would not undergo any serious
change owing to the policies adopted by the kings or generals. But now,
where the spirit of the Western nationalism prevails, the whole people
is being taught from boyhood to foster hatreds and ambitions by all
kinds of means--by the manufacture of half-truths and untruths in
history, by persistent misrepresentation of other races and the culture
of unfavourable sentiments towards them, by setting up memorials of
events, very often false, which for the sake of humanity should be
speedily forgotten, thus continually brewing evil menace towards
neighbours and nations other than their own. This is poisoning the very
fountainhead of humanity. It is discrediting the ideals, which were born
of the lives of men who were our greatest and best. It is holding up
gigantic selfishness as the one universal religion for all nations of
the world. We can take anything else from the hands of science, but not
this elixir of moral death. Never think for a moment that the hurts you
inflict upon other races will not infect you, or that the enmities you
sow around your homes will be a wall of protection to you for all time
to come. To imbue the minds of a whole people with an abnormal vanity of
its own superiority, to teach it to take pride in its moral callousness
and ill-begotten wealth, to perpetuate humiliation of defeated nations
by exhibiting trophies won from war, and using these in schools in order
to breed in children's minds contempt for others, is imitating the West
where she has a festering sore, whose swelling is a swelling of disease
eating into its vitality.

Our food crops, which are necessary for our sustenance, are products of
centuries of selection and care. But the vegetation, which we have not
to transform into our lives, does not require the patient thoughts of
generations. It is not easy to get rid of weeds; but it is easy, by
process of neglect, to ruin your food crops and let them revert to their
primitive state of wildness. Likewise the culture, which has so kindly
adapted itself to your soil--so intimate with life, so human--not only
needed tilling and weeding in past ages, but still needs anxious work
and watching. What is merely modern--as science and methods of
organization--can be transplanted; but what is vitally human has fibres
so delicate, and roots so numerous and far-reaching, that it dies when
moved from its soil. Therefore I am afraid of the rude pressure of the
political ideals of the West upon your own. In political civilization,
the state is an abstraction and relationship of men utilitarian. Because
it has no root in sentiments, it is so dangerously easy to handle. Half
a century has been enough for you to master this machine; and there are
men among you whose fondness for it exceeds their love for the living
ideals, which were born with the birth of your nation and nursed in your
centuries. It is like a child who, in the excitement of his play,
imagines he likes his playthings better than his mother.

Where man is at his greatest, he is unconscious. Your civilization,
whose mainspring is the bond of human relationship, has been nourished
in the depth of a healthy life beyond reach of prying self-analysis. But
a mere political relationship is all-conscious; it is an eruptive
inflammation of aggressiveness. It has forcibly burst upon your notice.
And the time has come when you have to be roused into full
consciousness of the truth by which you live, so that you may not be
taken unawares. The past has been God's gift to you; about the present,
you must make your own choice.

So the questions you have to put to yourselves are these--"Have we read
the world wrong, and based our relation to it upon an ignorance of human
nature? Is the instinct of the West right, where she builds her national
welfare behind the barricade of a universal distrust of humanity?"

You must have detected a strong accent of fear whenever the West has
discussed the possibility of the rise of an Eastern race. The reason of
it is this, that the power by whose help she thrives is an evil power;
so long as it is held on her own side she can be safe, while the rest of
the world trembles. The vital ambition of the present civilization of
Europe is to have the exclusive possession of the devil. All her
armaments and diplomacy are directed upon this one object. But these
costly rituals for invocation of the evil spirit lead through a path of
prosperity to the brink of cataclysm. The furies of terror, which the
West has let loose upon God's world, come back to threaten herself and
goad her into preparations of more and more frightfulness; this gives
her no rest, and makes her forget all else but the perils that she
causes to others and incurs herself. To the worship of this devil of
politics she sacrifices other countries as victims. She feeds upon their
dead flesh and grows fat upon it, so long as the carcasses remain
fresh,--but they are sure to rot at last, and the dead will take their
revenge, by spreading pollution far and wide and poisoning the vitality
of the feeder. Japan had all her wealth of humanity, her harmony of
heroism and beauty, her depth of self-control and richness of
self-expression; yet the Western nations felt no respect for her till
she proved that the bloodhounds of Satan are not only bred in the
kennels of Europe but can also be domesticated in Japan and fed with
man's miseries. They admit Japan's equality with themselves, only when
they know that Japan also possesses the key to open the floodgate of
hell-fire upon the fair earth whenever she chooses, and can dance, in
their own measure, the devil dance of pillage, murder and ravishment of
innocent women, while the world goes to ruin. We know that, in the early
stage of man's moral immaturity, he only feels reverence for the god
whose malevolence he dreads. But is this the ideal of man which we can
look up to with pride? After centuries of civilization nations fearing
each other like the prowling wild beasts of the night-time; shutting
their doors of hospitality; combining only for purpose of aggression or
defence; hiding in their holes their trade secrets, state secrets,
secrets of their armaments; making peace-offerings to each other's
barking dogs with the meat which does not belong to them; holding down
fallen races which struggle to stand upon their feet; with their right
hands dispensing religion to weaker peoples, while robbing them with
their left,--is there anything in this to make us envious? Are we to
bend our knees to the spirit of this nationalism, which is sowing
broadcast over all the world seeds of fear, greed, suspicion, unashamed
lies of its diplomacy, and unctuous lies of its profession of peace and
good-will and universal brotherhood of Man? Can our minds be free from
doubt when we rush to the Western market to buy this foreign product in
exchange for our own inheritance? I am aware how difficult it is to know
one's self; and the man who is intoxicated furiously denies his
drunkenness; yet the West herself is anxiously thinking of her problems
and trying experiments. But she is like a glutton, who has not the
heart to give up his intemperance in eating, and fondly clings to the
hope that he can cure his nightmares of indigestion by medicine. Europe
is not ready to give up her political inhumanity, with all the baser
passions of man attendant upon it; she believes only in modification of
systems, and not in change of heart.

We are willing to buy their machine-made systems, not with our hearts,
but with our brains. We shall try them and build sheds for them, but not
enshrine them in our homes or temples. There are races who worship the
animals they kill; we can buy meat from them when we are hungry, but not
the worship which goes with the killing. We must not vitiate our
children's minds with the superstition that business is business, war is
war, politics is politics. We must know that man's business has to be
more than mere business, and so should be his war and politics. You had
your own industry in Japan; how scrupulously honest and true it was, you
can see by its products,--by their grace and strength, their
conscientiousness in details, where they can hardly be observed. But the
tidal wave of falsehood has swept over your land from that part of the
world where business is business, and honesty is followed merely as the
best policy. Have you never felt shame when you see the trade
advertisements, not only plastering the whole town with lies and
exaggerations, but invading the green fields, where the peasants do
their honest labour, and the hill-tops, which greet the first pure light
of the morning? It is so easy to dull our sense of honour and delicacy
of mind with constant abrasion, while falsehoods stalk abroad with proud
steps in the name of trade, politics and patriotism, that any protest
against their perpetual intrusion into our lives is considered to be
sentimentalism, unworthy of true manliness.

And it has come to pass that the children of those heroes who would keep
their word at the point of death, who would disdain to cheat men for
vulgar profit, who even in their fight would much rather court defeat
than be dishonourable, have become energetic in dealing with falsehoods
and do not feel humiliated by gaining advantage from them. And this has
been effected by the charm of the word "modern." But if undiluted
utility be modern, beauty is of all ages; if mean selfishness be modern,
the human ideals are no new inventions. And we must know for certain
that however modern may be the proficiency which cripples man for the
sake of methods and machines, it will never live to be old.

But while trying to free our minds from the arrogant claims of Europe
and to help ourselves out of the quicksands of our infatuation, we may
go to the other extreme and blind ourselves with a wholesale suspicion
of the West. The reaction of disillusionment is just as unreal as the
first shock of illusion. We must try to come to that normal state of
mind by which we can clearly discern our own danger and avoid it without
being unjust towards the source of that danger. There is always the
natural temptation in us of wishing to pay back Europe in her own coin,
and return contempt for contempt and evil for evil. But that again would
be to imitate Europe in one of her worst features, which comes out in
her behaviour to people whom she describes as yellow or red, brown or
black. And this is a point on which we in the East have to acknowledge
our guilt and own that our sin has been as great, if not greater, when
we insulted humanity by treating with utter disdain and cruelty men who
belonged to a particular creed, colour or caste. It is really because we
are afraid of our own weakness, which allows itself to be overcome by
the sight of power, that we try to substitute for it another weakness
which makes itself blind to the glories of the West. When we truly know
the Europe which is great and good, we can effectively save ourselves
from the Europe which is mean and grasping. It is easy to be unfair in
one's judgment when one is faced with human miseries,--and pessimism is
the result of building theories while the mind is suffering. To despair
of humanity is only possible if we lose faith in truth which brings to
it strength, when its defeat is greatest, and calls out new life from
the depth of its destruction. We must admit that there is a living soul
in the West which is struggling unobserved against the hugeness of the
organizations under which men, women and children are being crushed, and
whose mechanical necessities are ignoring laws that are spiritual and
human,--the soul whose sensibilities refuse to be dulled completely by
dangerous habits of heedlessness in dealings with races for whom it
lacks natural sympathy. The West could never have risen to the eminence
she has reached if her strength were merely the strength of the brute or
of the machine. The divine in her heart is suffering from the injuries
inflicted by her hands upon the world,--and from this pain of her higher
nature flows the secret balm which will bring healing to those injuries.
Time after time she has fought against herself and has undone the chains
which with her own hands she had fastened round helpless limbs; and
though she forced poison down the throat of a great nation at the point
of the sword for gain of money, she herself woke up to withdraw from it,
to wash her hands clean again. This shows hidden springs of humanity in
spots which look dead and barren. It proves that the deeper truth in her
nature, which can survive such a career of cruel cowardliness, is not
greed, but reverence for unselfish ideals. It would be altogether
unjust, both to us and to Europe, to say that she has fascinated the
modern Eastern mind by the mere exhibition of her power. Through the
smoke of cannons and dust of markets the light of her moral nature has
shone bright, and she has brought to us the ideal of ethical freedom,
whose foundation lies deeper than social conventions and whose province
of activity is world-wide.

The East has instinctively felt, even through her aversion, that she has
a great deal to learn from Europe, not merely about the materials of
power, but about its inner source, which is of mind and of the moral
nature of man. Europe has been teaching us the higher obligations of
public good above those of the family and the clan, and the sacredness
of law, which makes society independent of individual caprice, secures
for it continuity of progress, and guarantees justice to all men of all
positions in life. Above all things Europe has held high before our
minds the banner of liberty, through centuries of martyrdom and
achievement,--liberty of conscience, liberty of thought and action,
liberty in the ideals of art and literature. And because Europe has won
our deep respect, she has become so dangerous for us where she is
turbulently weak and false,--dangerous like poison when it is served
along with our best food. There is one safety for us upon which we hope
we may count, and that is, that we can claim Europe herself as our ally
in our resistance to her temptations and to her violent encroachments;
for she has ever carried her own standard of perfection, by which we can
measure her falls and gauge her degrees of failure, by which we can call
her before her own tribunal and put her to shame,--the shame which is
the sign of the true pride of nobleness.

But our fear is, that the poison may be more powerful than the food,
and what is strength in her to-day may not be the sign of health, but
the contrary; for it may be temporarily caused by the upsetting of the
balance of life. Our fear is that evil has a fateful fascination when it
assumes dimensions which are colossal,--and though at last it is sure to
lose its centre of gravity by its abnormal disproportion, the mischief
which it creates before its fall may be beyond reparation.

Therefore I ask you to have the strength of faith and clarity of mind to
know for certain that the lumbering structure of modern progress,
riveted by the iron bolts of efficiency, which runs upon the wheels of
ambition, cannot hold together for long. Collisions are certain to
occur; for it has to travel upon organized lines, it is too heavy to
choose its own course freely; and once it is off the rails, its endless
train of vehicles is dislocated. A day will come when it will fall in a
heap of ruin and cause serious obstruction to the traffic of the world.
Do we not see signs of this even now? Does not the voice come to us,
through the din of war, the shrieks of hatred, the wailings of despair,
through the churning up of the unspeakable filth which has been
accumulating for ages in the bottom of this nationalism,--the voice
which cries to our soul that the tower of national selfishness, which
goes by the name of patriotism, which has raised its banner of treason
against heaven, must totter and fall with a crash, weighed down by its
own bulk, its flag kissing the dust, its light extinguished? My
brothers, when the red light of conflagration sends up its crackle of
laughter to the stars, keep your faith upon those stars and not upon the
fire of destruction. For when this conflagration consumes itself and
dies down, leaving its memorial in ashes, the eternal light will again
shine in the East,--the East which has been the birthplace of the
morning sun of man's history. And who knows if that day has not already
dawned, and the sun not risen, in the Easternmost horizon of Asia? And I
offer, as did my ancestor rishis, my salutation to that sunrise of the
East, which is destined once again to illumine the whole world.

I know my voice is too feeble to raise itself above the uproar of this
bustling time, and it is easy for any street urchin to fling against me
the epithet of "unpractical." It will stick to my coat-tail, never to be
washed away, effectively excluding me from the consideration of all
respectable persons. I know what a risk one runs from the vigorously
athletic crowds in being styled an idealist in these days, when thrones
have lost their dignity and prophets have become an anachronism, when
the sound that drowns all voices is the noise of the market-place. Yet
when, one day, standing on the outskirts of Yokohama town, bristling
with its display of modern miscellanies, I watched the sunset in your
southern sea, and saw its peace and majesty among your pine-clad
hills,--with the great Fujiyama growing faint against the golden
horizon, like a god overcome with his own radiance,--the music of
eternity welled up through the evening silence, and I felt that the sky
and the earth and the lyrics of the dawn and the dayfall are with the
poets and idealists, and not with the marketmen robustly contemptuous of
all sentiment,--that, after the forgetfulness of his own divinity, man
will remember again that heaven is always in touch with his world, which
can never be abandoned for good to the hounding wolves of the modern
era, scenting human blood and howling to the skies.




NATIONALISM IN INDIA


Our real problem in India is not political. It is social. This is a
condition not only prevailing in India, but among all nations. I do not
believe in an exclusive political interest. Politics in the West have
dominated Western ideals, and we in India are trying to imitate you. We
have to remember that in Europe, where peoples had their racial unity
from the beginning, and where natural resources were insufficient for
the inhabitants, the civilization has naturally taken the character of
political and commercial aggressiveness. For on the one hand they had no
internal complications, and on the other they had to deal with
neighbours who were strong and rapacious. To have perfect combination
among themselves and a watchful attitude of animosity against others was
taken as the solution of their problems. In former days they organized
and plundered, in the present age the same spirit continues--and they
organize and exploit the whole world.

But from the earliest beginnings of history India has had her own
problem constantly before her--it is the race problem. Each nation must
be conscious of its mission, and we, in India, must realize that we cut
a poor figure when we are trying to be political, simply because we have
not yet been finally able to accomplish what was set before us by our
providence.

This problem of race unity which we have been trying to solve for so
many years has likewise to be faced by you here in America. Many people
in this country ask me what is happening as to the caste distinctions in
India. But when this question is asked me, it is usually done with a
superior air. And I feel tempted to put the same question to our
American critics with a slight modification, "What have you done with
the Red Indian and the Negro?" For you have not got over your attitude
of caste toward them. You have used violent methods to keep aloof from
other races, but until you have solved the question here in America, you
have no right to question India.

In spite of our great difficulty, however, India has done something. She
has tried to make an adjustment of races, to acknowledge the real
differences between them where these exist, and yet seek for some basis
of unity. This basis has come through our saints, like Nanak, Kabir,
Chaitnaya and others, preaching one God to all races of India.

In finding the solution of our problem we shall have helped to solve the
world problem as well. What India has been, the whole world is now. The
whole world is becoming one country through scientific facility. And the
moment is arriving when you also must find a basis of unity which is not
political. If India can offer to the world her solution, it will be a
contribution to humanity. There is only one history--the history of man.
All national histories are merely chapters in the larger one. And we are
content in India to suffer for such a great cause.

Each individual has his self-love. Therefore his brute instinct leads
him to fight with others in the sole pursuit of his self-interest. But
man has also his higher instincts of sympathy and mutual help. The
people who are lacking in this higher moral power and who therefore
cannot combine in fellowship with one another must perish or live in a
state of degradation. Only those peoples have survived and achieved
civilization who have this spirit of co-operation strong in them. So we
find that from the beginning of history men had to choose between
fighting with one another and combining, between serving their own
interest or the common interest of all.

In our early history, when the geographical limits of each country and
also the facilities of communication were small, this problem was
comparatively small in dimension. It was sufficient for men to develop
their sense of unity within their area of segregation. In those days
they combined among themselves and fought against others. But it was
this moral spirit of combination which was the true basis of their
greatness, and this fostered their art, science and religion. At that
early time the most important fact that man had to take count of was the
fact of the members of one particular race of men coming in close
contact with one another. Those who truly grasped this fact through
their higher nature made their mark in history.

The most important fact of the present age is that all the different
races of men have come close together. And again we are confronted with
two alternatives. The problem is whether the different groups of peoples
shall go on fighting with one another or find out some true basis of
reconciliation and mutual help; whether it will be interminable
competition or co-operation.

I have no hesitation in saying that those who are gifted with the moral
power of love and vision of spiritual unity, who have the least feeling
of enmity against aliens, and the sympathetic insight to place
themselves in the position of others, will be the fittest to take their
permanent place in the age that is lying before us, and those who are
constantly developing their instinct of fight and intolerance of aliens
will be eliminated. For this is the problem before us, and we have to
prove our humanity by solving it through the help of our higher nature.
The gigantic organizations for hurting others and warding off their
blows, for making money by dragging others back, will not help us. On
the contrary, by their crushing weight, their enormous cost and their
deadening effect upon living humanity, they will seriously impede our
freedom in the larger life of a higher civilization.

During the evolution of the Nation the moral culture of brotherhood was
limited by geographical boundaries, because at that time those
boundaries were true. Now they have become imaginary lines of tradition
divested of the qualities of real obstacles. So the time has come when
man's moral nature must deal with this great fact with all seriousness
or perish. The first impulse of this change of circumstance has been the
churning up of man's baser passions of greed and cruel hatred. If this
persists indefinitely, and armaments go on exaggerating themselves to
unimaginable absurdities, and machines and storehouses envelop this fair
earth with their dirt and smoke and ugliness, then it will end in a
conflagration of suicide. Therefore man will have to exert all his power
of love and clarity of vision to make another great moral adjustment
which will comprehend the whole world of men and not merely the
fractional groups of nationality. The call has come to every individual
in the present age to prepare himself and his surroundings for this dawn
of a new era, when man shall discover his soul in the spiritual unity of
all human beings.

If it is given at all to the West to struggle out of these tangles of
the lower slopes to the spiritual summit of humanity then I cannot but
think that it is the special mission of America to fulfil this hope of
God and man. You are the country of expectation, desiring something else
than what is. Europe has her subtle habits of mind and her conventions.
But America, as yet, has come to no conclusions. I realize how much
America is untrammelled by the traditions of the past, and I can
appreciate that experimentalism is a sign of America's youth. The
foundation of her glory is in the future, rather than in the past; and
if one is gifted with the power of clairvoyance, one will be able to
love the America that is to be.

America is destined to justify Western civilization to the East. Europe
has lost faith in humanity, and has become distrustful and sickly.
America, on the other hand, is not pessimistic or blasé. You know, as a
people, that there is such a thing as a better and a best; and that
knowledge drives you on. There are habits that are not merely passive
but aggressively arrogant. They are not like mere walls, but are like
hedges of stinging nettles. Europe has been cultivating these hedges of
habits for long years, till they have grown round her dense and strong
and high. The pride of her traditions has sent its roots deep into her
heart. I do not wish to contend that it is unreasonable. But pride in
every form breeds blindness at the end. Like all artificial stimulants
its first effect is a heightening of consciousness, and then with the
increasing dose it muddles it and brings an exultation that is
misleading. Europe has gradually grown hardened in her pride in all her
outer and inner habits. She not only cannot forget that she is Western,
but she takes every opportunity to hurl this fact against others to
humiliate them. This is why she is growing incapable of imparting to the
East what is best in herself, and of accepting in a right spirit the
wisdom that the East has stored for centuries.

In America national habits and traditions have not had time to spread
their clutching roots round your hearts. You have constantly felt and
complained of your disadvantages when you compared your nomadic
restlessness with the settled traditions of Europe--the Europe which can
show her picture of greatness to the best advantage because she can fix
it against the background of the Past. But in this present age of
transition, when a new era of civilization is sending its trumpet-call
to all peoples of the world across an unlimited future, this very
freedom of detachment will enable you to accept its invitation and to
achieve the goal for which Europe began her journey but lost herself
midway. For she was tempted out of her path by her pride of power and
greed of possession.

Not merely your freedom from habits of mind in individuals, but also
the freedom of your history from all unclean entanglements, fits you in
your career of holding the banner of civilization of the future. All the
great nations of Europe have their victims in other parts of the world.
This not only deadens their moral sympathy but also their intellectual
sympathy, which is so necessary for the understanding of races which are
different from one's own. Englishmen can never truly understand India,
because their minds are not disinterested with regard to that country.
If you compare England with Germany or France you will find she has
produced the smallest number of scholars who have studied Indian
literature and philosophy with any amount of sympathetic insight or
thoroughness. This attitude of apathy and contempt is natural where the
relationship is abnormal and founded upon national selfishness and
pride. But your history has been disinterested, and that is why you have
been able to help Japan in her lessons in Western civilization, and that
is why China can look upon you with her best confidence in this her
darkest period of danger. In fact you are carrying all the
responsibility of a great future because you are untrammelled by the
grasping miserliness of a past. Therefore of all countries of the earth
America has to be fully conscious of this future, her vision must not be
obscured and her faith in humanity must be strong with the strength of
youth.

A parallelism exists between America and India--the parallelism of
welding together into one body various races.

In my country we have been seeking to find out something common to all
races, which will prove their real unity. No nation looking for a mere
political or commercial basis of unity will find such a solution
sufficient. Men of thought and power will discover the spiritual unity,
will realize it, and preach it.

India has never had a real sense of nationalism. Even though from
childhood I had been taught that idolatry of the Nation is almost better
than reverence for God and humanity, I believe I have outgrown that
teaching, and it is my conviction that my countrymen will truly gain
their India by fighting against the education which teaches them that a
country is greater than the ideals of humanity.

The educated Indian at present is trying to absorb some lessons from
history contrary to the lessons of our ancestors. The East, in fact, is
attempting to take unto itself a history which is not the outcome of its
own living. Japan, for example, thinks she is getting powerful through
adopting Western methods, but, after she has exhausted her inheritance,
only the borrowed weapons of civilization will remain to her. She will
not have developed herself from within.

Europe has her past. Europe's strength therefore lies in her history.
We, in India, must make up our minds that we cannot borrow other
people's history, and that if we stifle our own we are committing
suicide. When you borrow things that do not belong to your life, they
only serve to crush your life.

And therefore I believe that it does India no good to compete with
Western civilization in its own field. But we shall be more than
compensated if, in spite of the insults heaped upon us, we follow our
own destiny.

There are lessons which impart information or train our minds for
intellectual pursuits. These are simple and can be acquired and used
with advantage. But there are others which affect our deeper nature and
change our direction of life. Before we accept them and pay their value
by selling our own inheritance, we must pause and think deeply. In man's
history there come ages of fireworks which dazzle us by their force and
movement. They laugh not only at our modest household lamps but also at
the eternal stars. But let us not for that provocation be precipitate in
our desire to dismiss our lamps. Let us patiently bear our present
insult and realize that these fireworks have splendour but not
permanence, because of the extreme explosiveness which is the cause of
their power, and also of their exhaustion. They are spending a fatal
quantity of energy and substance compared to their gain and production.

Anyhow, our ideals have been evolved through our own history, and even
if we wished we could only make poor fireworks of them, because their
materials are different from yours, as is also their moral purpose. If
we cherish the desire of paying our all to buy a political nationality
it will be as absurd as if Switzerland had staked her existence on her
ambition to build up a navy powerful enough to compete with that of
England. The mistake that we make is in thinking that man's channel of
greatness is only one--the one which has made itself painfully evident
for the time being by its depth of insolence.

We must know for certain that there is a future before us and that
future is waiting for those who are rich in moral ideals and not in mere
things. And it is the privilege of man to work for fruits that are
beyond his immediate reach, and to adjust his life not in slavish
conformity to the examples of some present success or even to his own
prudent past, limited in its aspiration, but to an infinite future
bearing in its heart the ideals of our highest expectations.

We must recognize that it is providential that the West has come to
India. And yet some one must show the East to the West, and convince the
West that the East has her contribution to make to the history of
civilization. India is no beggar of the West. And yet even though the
West may think she is, I am not for thrusting off Western civilization
and becoming segregated in our independence. Let us have a deep
association. If Providence wants England to be the channel of that
communication, of that deeper association, I am willing to accept it
with all humility. I have great faith in human nature, and I think the
West will find its true mission. I speak bitterly of Western
civilization when I am conscious that it is betraying its trust and
thwarting its own purpose. The West must not make herself a curse to the
world by using her power for her own selfish needs, but, by teaching the
ignorant and helping the weak, she should save herself from the worst
danger that the strong is liable to incur by making the feeble acquire
power enough to resist her intrusion. And also she must not make her
materialism to be the final thing, but must realize that she is doing a
service in freeing the spiritual being from the tyranny of matter.

I am not against one nation in particular, but against the general idea
of all nations. What is the Nation?

It is the aspect of a whole people as an organized power. This
organization incessantly keeps up the insistence of the population on
becoming strong and efficient. But this strenuous effort after strength
and efficiency drains man's energy from his higher nature where he is
self-sacrificing and creative. For thereby man's power of sacrifice is
diverted from his ultimate object, which is moral, to the maintenance of
this organization, which is mechanical. Yet in this he feels all the
satisfaction of moral exaltation and therefore becomes supremely
dangerous to humanity. He feels relieved of the urging of his conscience
when he can transfer his responsibility to this machine which is the
creation of his intellect and not of his complete moral personality. By
this device the people which loves freedom perpetuates slavery in a
large portion of the world with the comfortable feeling of pride of
having done its duty; men who are naturally just can be cruelly unjust
both in their act and their thought, accompanied by a feeling that they
are helping the world to receive its deserts; men who are honest can
blindly go on robbing others of their human rights for
self-aggrandizement, all the while abusing the deprived for not
deserving better treatment. We have seen in our everyday life even small
organizations of business and profession produce callousness of feeling
in men who are not naturally bad, and we can well imagine what a moral
havoc it is causing in a world where whole peoples are furiously
organizing themselves for gaining wealth and power.

Nationalism is a great menace. It is the particular thing which for
years has been at the bottom of India's troubles. And inasmuch as we
have been ruled and dominated by a nation that is strictly political in
its attitude, we have tried to develop within ourselves, despite our
inheritance from the past, a belief in our eventual political destiny.

There are different parties in India, with different ideals. Some are
struggling for political independence. Others think that the time has
not arrived for that, and yet believe that India should have the rights
that the English colonies have. They wish to gain autonomy as far as
possible.

In the beginning of the history of political agitation in India there
was not the conflict between parties which there is to-day. At that time
there was a party known as the Indian Congress; it had no real
programme. They had a few grievances for redress by the authorities.
They wanted larger representation in the Council House, and more freedom
in Municipal government. They wanted scraps of things, but they had no
constructive ideal. Therefore I was lacking in enthusiasm for their
methods. It was my conviction that what India most needed was
constructive work coming from within herself. In this work we must take
all risks and go on doing the duties which by right are ours, though in
the teeth of persecution; winning moral victory at every step, by our
failure and suffering. We must show those who are over us that we have
in ourselves the strength of moral power, the power to suffer for truth.
Where we have nothing to show, we have only to beg. It would be
mischievous if the gifts we wish for were granted to us at once, and I
have told my countrymen, time and again, to combine for the work of
creating opportunities to give vent to our spirit of self-sacrifice, and
not for the purpose of begging.

The party, however, lost power because the people soon came to realize
how futile was the half policy adopted by them. The party split, and
there arrived the Extremists, who advocated independence of action, and
discarded the begging method,--the easiest method of relieving one's
mind from his responsibility towards his country. Their ideals were
based on Western history. They had no sympathy with the special problems
of India. They did not recognize the patent fact that there were causes
in our social organization which made the Indian incapable of coping
with the alien. What should we do if, for any reason, England was driven
away? We should simply be victims for other nations. The same social
weaknesses would prevail. The thing we in India have to think of is
this--to remove those social customs and ideals which have generated a
want of self-respect and a complete dependence on those above us,--a
state of affairs which has been brought about entirely by the domination
in India of the caste system, and the blind and lazy habit of relying
upon the authority of traditions that are incongruous anachronisms in
the present age.

Once again I draw your attention to the difficulties India has had to
encounter and her struggle to overcome them. Her problem was the problem
of the world in miniature. India is too vast in its area and too diverse
in its races. It is many countries packed in one geographical
receptacle. It is just the opposite of what Europe truly is, namely, one
country made into many. Thus Europe in its culture and growth has had
the advantage of the strength of the many as well as the strength of the
one. India, on the contrary, being naturally many, yet adventitiously
one, has all along suffered from the looseness of its diversity and the
feebleness of its unity. A true unity is like a round globe, it rolls
on, carrying its burden easily; but diversity is a many-cornered thing
which has to be dragged and pushed with all force. Be it said to the
credit of India that this diversity was not her own creation; she has
had to accept it as a fact from the beginning of her history. In America
and Australia, Europe has simplified her problem by almost exterminating
the original population. Even in the present age this spirit of
extermination is making itself manifest, in the inhospitable shutting
out of aliens, by those who themselves were aliens in the lands they now
occupy. But India tolerated difference of races from the first, and that
spirit of toleration has acted all through her history.

Her caste system is the outcome of this spirit of toleration. For India
has all along been trying experiments in evolving a social unity within
which all the different peoples could be held together, while fully
enjoying the freedom of maintaining their own differences. The tie has
been as loose as possible, yet as close as the circumstances permitted.
This has produced something like a United States of a social federation,
whose common name is Hinduism.

India had felt that diversity of races there must be and should be,
whatever may be its drawback, and you can never coerce nature into your
narrow limits of convenience without paying one day very dearly for it.
In this India was right; but what she failed to realize was that in
human beings differences are not like the physical barriers of
mountains, fixed for ever--they are fluid with life's flow, they are
changing their courses and their shapes and volume.

Therefore in her caste regulations India recognized differences, but not
the mutability which is the law of life. In trying to avoid collisions
she set up boundaries of immovable walls, thus giving to her numerous
races the negative benefit of peace and order but not the positive
opportunity of expansion and movement. She accepted nature where it
produces diversity, but ignored it where it uses that diversity for its
world-game of infinite permutations and combinations. She treated life
in all truth where it is manifold, but insulted it where it is ever
moving. Therefore Life departed from her social system and in its place
she is worshipping with all ceremony the magnificent cage of countless
compartments that she has manufactured.

The same thing happened where she tried to ward off the collisions of
trade interests. She associated different trades and professions with
different castes. This had the effect of allaying for good the
interminable jealousy and hatred of competition--the competition which
breeds cruelty and makes the atmosphere thick with lies and deception.
In this also India laid all her emphasis upon the law of heredity,
ignoring the law of mutation, and thus gradually reduced arts into
crafts and genius into skill.

However, what Western observers fail to discern is that in her caste
system India in all seriousness accepted her responsibility to solve the
race problem in such a manner as to avoid all friction, and yet to
afford each race freedom within its boundaries. Let us admit India has
not in this achieved a full measure of success. But this you must also
concede, that the West, being more favourably situated as to homogeneity
of races, has never given her attention to this problem, and whenever
confronted with it she has tried to make it easy by ignoring it
altogether. And this is the source of her anti-Asiatic agitations for
depriving aliens of their right to earn their honest living on these
shores. In most of your colonies you only admit them on condition of
their accepting the menial position of hewers of wood and drawers of
water. Either you shut your doors against the aliens or reduce them into
slavery. And this is your solution of the problem of race-conflict.
Whatever may be its merits you will have to admit that it does not
spring from the higher impulses of civilization, but from the lower
passions of greed and hatred. You say this is human nature--and India
also thought she knew human nature when she strongly barricaded her race
distinctions by the fixed barriers of social gradations. But we have
found out to our cost that human nature is not what it seems, but what
it is in truth; which is in its infinite possibilities. And when we in
our blindness insult humanity for its ragged appearance it sheds its
disguise to disclose to us that we have insulted our God. The
degradation which we cast upon others in our pride or self-interest
degrades our own humanity--and this is the punishment which is most
terrible, because we do not detect it till it is too late.

Not only in your relation with aliens but with the different sections of
your own society you have not achieved harmony of reconciliation. The
spirit of conflict and competition is allowed the full freedom of its
reckless career. And because its genesis is the greed of wealth and
power it can never come to any other end but to a violent death. In
India the production of commodities was brought under the law of social
adjustments. Its basis was co-operation, having for its object the
perfect satisfaction of social needs. But in the West it is guided by
the impulse of competition, whose end is the gain of wealth for
individuals. But the individual is like the geometrical line; it is
length without breadth. It has not got the depth to be able to hold
anything permanently. Therefore its greed or gain can never come to
finality. In its lengthening process of growth it can cross other lines
and cause entanglements, but will ever go on missing the ideal of
completeness in its thinness of isolation.

In all our physical appetites we recognize a limit. We know that to
exceed that limit is to exceed the limit of health. But has this lust
for wealth and power no bounds beyond which is death's dominion? In
these national carnivals of materialism are not the Western peoples
spending most of their vital energy in merely producing things and
neglecting the creation of ideals? And can a civilization ignore the law
of moral health and go on in its endless process of inflation by gorging
upon material things? Man in his social ideals naturally tries to
regulate his appetites, subordinating them to the higher purpose of his
nature. But in the economic world our appetites follow no other
restrictions but those of supply and demand which can be artificially
fostered, affording individuals opportunities for indulgence in an
endless feast of grossness. In India our social instincts imposed
restrictions upon our appetites,--maybe it went to the extreme of
repression,--but in the West the spirit of economic organization with no
moral purpose goads the people into the perpetual pursuit of wealth; but
has this no wholesome limit?

The ideals that strive to take form in social institutions have two
objects. One is to regulate our passions and appetites for the
harmonious development of man, and the other is to help him to cultivate
disinterested love for his fellow-creatures. Therefore society is the
expression of those moral and spiritual aspirations of man which belong
to his higher nature.

Our food is creative, it builds our body; but not so wine, which
stimulates. Our social ideals create the human world, but when our mind
is diverted from them to greed of power then in that state of
intoxication we live in a world of abnormality where our strength is not
health and our liberty is not freedom. Therefore political freedom does
not give us freedom when our mind is not free. An automobile does not
create freedom of movement, because it is a mere machine. When I myself
am free I can use the automobile for the purpose of my freedom.

We must never forget in the present day that those people who have got
their political freedom are not necessarily free, they are merely
powerful. The passions which are unbridled in them are creating huge
organizations of slavery in the disguise of freedom. Those who have made
the gain of money their highest end are unconsciously selling their life
and soul to rich persons or to the combinations that represent money.
Those who are enamoured of their political power and gloat over their
extension of dominion over foreign races gradually surrender their own
freedom and humanity to the organizations necessary for holding other
peoples in slavery. In the so-called free countries the majority of the
people are not free, they are driven by the minority to a goal which is
not even known to them. This becomes possible only because people do not
acknowledge moral and spiritual freedom as their object. They create
huge eddies with their passions, and they feel dizzily inebriated with
the mere velocity of their whirling movement, taking that to be freedom.
But the doom which is waiting to overtake them is as certain as
death--for man's truth is moral truth and his emancipation is in the
spiritual life.

The general opinion of the majority of the present-day nationalists in
India is that we have come to a final completeness in our social and
spiritual ideals, the task of the constructive work of society having
been done several thousand years before we were born, and that now we
are free to employ all our activities in the political direction. We
never dream of blaming our social inadequacy as the origin of our
present helplessness, for we have accepted as the creed of our
nationalism that this social system has been perfected for all time to
come by our ancestors, who had the superhuman vision of all eternity and
supernatural power for making infinite provision for future ages.
Therefore, for all our miseries and shortcomings, we hold responsible
the historical surprises that burst upon us from outside. This is the
reason why we think that our one task is to build a political miracle of
freedom upon the quicksand of social slavery. In fact we want to dam up
the true course of our own historical stream, and only borrow power from
the sources of other peoples' history.

Those of us in India who have come under the delusion that mere
political freedom will make us free have accepted their lessons from the
West as the gospel truth and lost their faith in humanity. We must
remember whatever weakness we cherish in our society will become the
source of danger in politics. The same inertia which leads us to our
idolatry of dead forms in social institutions will create in our
politics prison-houses with immovable walls. The narrowness of sympathy
which makes it possible for us to impose upon a considerable portion of
humanity the galling yoke of inferiority will assert itself in our
politics in creating the tyranny of injustice.

When our nationalists talk about ideals they forget that the basis of
nationalism is wanting. The very people who are upholding these ideals
are themselves the most conservative in their social practice.
Nationalists say, for example, look at Switzerland where, in spite of
race differences, the peoples have solidified into a nation. Yet,
remember that in Switzerland the races can mingle, they can intermarry,
because they are of the same blood. In India there is no common
birthright. And when we talk of Western Nationality we forget that the
nations there do not have that physical repulsion, one for the other,
that we have between different castes. Have we an instance in the whole
world where a people who are not allowed to mingle their blood shed
their blood for one another except by coercion or for mercenary
purposes? And can we ever hope that these moral barriers against our
race amalgamation will not stand in the way of our political unity?

Then again we must give full recognition to this fact that our social
restrictions are still tyrannical, so much so as to make men cowards. If
a man tells me he has heterodox ideas, but that he cannot follow them
because he would be socially ostracized, I excuse him for having to live
a life of untruth, in order to live at all. The social habit of mind
which impels us to make the life of our fellow-beings a burden to them
where they differ from us even in such a thing as their choice of food,
is sure to persist in our political organization and result in creating
engines of coercion to crush every rational difference which is the sign
of life. And tyranny will only add to the inevitable lies and hypocrisy
in our political life. Is the mere name of freedom so valuable that we
should be willing to sacrifice for its sake our moral freedom?

The intemperance of our habits does not immediately show its effects
when we are in the vigour of our youth. But it gradually consumes that
vigour, and when the period of decline sets in then we have to settle
accounts and pay off our debts, which leads us to insolvency. In the
West you are still able to carry your head high, though your humanity is
suffering every moment from its dipsomania of organizing power. India
also in the heyday of her youth could carry in her vital organs the dead
weight of her social organizations stiffened to rigid perfection, but it
has been fatal to her, and has produced a gradual paralysis of her
living nature. And this is the reason why the educated community of
India has become insensible of her social needs. They are taking the
very immobility of our social structures as the sign of their
perfection,--and because the healthy feeling of pain is dead in the
limbs of our social organism they delude themselves into thinking that
it needs no ministration. Therefore they think that all their energies
need their only scope in the political field. It is like a man whose
legs have become shrivelled and useless, trying to delude himself that
these limbs have grown still because they have attained their ultimate
salvation, and all that is wrong about him is the shortness of his
sticks.

So much for the social and the political regeneration of India. Now we
come to her industries, and I am very often asked whether there is in
India any industrial regeneration since the advent of the British
Government. It must be remembered that at the beginning of the British
rule in India our industries were suppressed, and since then we have not
met with any real help or encouragement to enable us to make a stand
against the monster commercial organizations of the world. The nations
have decreed that we must remain purely an agricultural people, even
forgetting the use of arms for all time to come. Thus India is being
turned into so many predigested morsels of food ready to be swallowed at
any moment by any nation which has even the most rudimentary set of
teeth in its head.

India therefore has very little outlet for her industrial originality. I
personally do not believe in the unwieldy organizations of the present
day. The very fact that they are ugly shows that they are in discordance
with the whole creation. The vast powers of nature do not reveal their
truth in hideousness, but in beauty. Beauty is the signature which the
Creator stamps upon His works when He is satisfied with them. All our
products that insolently ignore the laws of perfection and are unashamed
in their display of ungainliness bear the perpetual weight of God's
displeasure. So far as your commerce lacks the dignity of grace it is
untrue. Beauty and her twin brother Truth require leisure and
self-control for their growth. But the greed of gain has no time or
limit to its capaciousness. Its one object is to produce and consume. It
has pity neither for beautiful nature nor for living human beings. It is
ruthlessly ready without a moment's hesitation to crush beauty and life
out of them, moulding them into money. It is this ugly vulgarity of
commerce which brought upon it the censure of contempt in our earlier
days, when men had leisure to have an unclouded vision of perfection in
humanity. Men in those times were rightly ashamed of the instinct of
mere money-making. But in this scientific age money, by its very
abnormal bulk, has won its throne. And when from its eminence of
piled-up things it insults the higher instincts of man, banishing beauty
and noble sentiments from its surroundings, we submit. For we in our
meanness have accepted bribes from its hands and our imagination has
grovelled in the dust before its immensity of flesh.

But its very unwieldiness and its endless complexities are its true
signs of failure. The swimmer who is an expert does not exhibit his
muscular force by violent movements, but exhibits some power which is
invisible and which shows itself in perfect grace and reposefulness. The
true distinction of man from animals is in his power and worth which are
inner and invisible. But the present-day commercial civilization of man
is not only taking too much time and space but killing time and space.
Its movements are violent, its noise is discordantly loud. It is
carrying its own damnation because it is trampling into distortion the
humanity upon which it stands. It is strenuously turning out money at
the cost of happiness. Man is reducing himself to his minimum in order
to be able to make amplest room for his organizations. He is deriding
his human sentiments into shame because they are apt to stand in the way
of his machines.

In our mythology we have the legend that the man who performs penances
for attaining immortality has to meet with temptations sent by Indra,
the Lord of the immortals. If he is lured by them he is lost. The West
has been striving for centuries after its goal of immortality. Indra has
sent her the temptation to try her. It is the gorgeous temptation of
wealth. She has accepted it, and her civilization of humanity has lost
its path in the wilderness of machinery.

This commercialism with its barbarity of ugly decorations is a terrible
menace to all humanity, because it is setting up the ideal of power over
that of perfection. It is making the cult of self-seeking exult in its
naked shamelessness. Our nerves are more delicate than our muscles.
Things that are the most precious in us are helpless as babes when we
take away from them the careful protection which they claim from us for
their very preciousness. Therefore, when the callous rudeness of power
runs amuck in the broad-way of humanity it scares away by its grossness
the ideals which we have cherished with the martyrdom of centuries.

The temptation which is fatal for the strong is still more so for the
weak. And I do not welcome it in our Indian life, even though it be sent
by the lord of the Immortals. Let our life be simple in its outer aspect
and rich in its inner gain. Let our civilization take its firm stand
upon its basis of social co-operation and not upon that of economic
exploitation and conflict. How to do it in the teeth of the drainage of
our life-blood by the economic dragons is the task set before the
thinkers of all oriental nations who have faith in the human soul. It is
a sign of laziness and impotency to accept conditions imposed upon us by
others who have other ideals than ours. We should actively try to adapt
the world powers to guide our history to its own perfect end.

From the above you will know that I am not an economist. I am willing to
acknowledge that there is a law of demand and supply and an infatuation
of man for more things than are good for him. And yet I will persist in
believing that there is such a thing as the harmony of completeness in
humanity, where poverty does not take away his riches, where defeat may
lead him to victory, death to immortality, and where in the compensation
of Eternal Justice those who are the last may yet have their insult
transmuted into a golden triumph.




THE SUNSET OF THE CENTURY

(_Written in the Bengali on the last day of last century_)


1

     The last sun of the century sets amidst the blood-red clouds of the
       West and the whirlwind of hatred.
     The naked passion of self-love of Nations, in its drunken delirium
       of greed, is dancing to the clash of steel and the howling verses
       of vengeance.


2

     The hungry self of the Nation shall burst in a violence of fury from
       its own shameless feeding.
     For it has made the world its food,
     And licking it, crunching it and swallowing it in big morsels,
             It swells and swells
     Till in the midst of its unholy feast descends the sudden shaft of
       heaven piercing its heart of grossness.


3

     The crimson glow of light on the horizon is not the light of thy
       dawn of peace, my Motherland.
     It is the glimmer of the funeral pyre burning to ashes the vast
       flesh,--the self-love of the Nation--dead under its own excess.
     Thy morning waits behind the patient dark of the East,
             Meek and silent.


4

     Keep watch, India.
     Bring your offerings of worship for that sacred sunrise.
     Let the first hymn of its welcome sound in your voice and sing
     "Come, Peace, thou daughter of God's own great suffering.
     Come with thy treasure of contentment, the sword of fortitude,
             And meekness crowning thy forehead."


5

     Be not ashamed, my brothers, to stand before the proud and the
       powerful
             With your white robe of simpleness.
     Let your crown be of humility, your freedom the freedom of the
       soul.
     Build God's throne daily upon the ample bareness of your poverty
     And know that what is huge is not great and pride is not
       everlasting.


THE END


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATIONALISM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Songs of Kabir
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Songs of Kabir

Author: Kabir

Author of introduction, etc.: Evelyn Underhill

Translator: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6519]
                Most recently updated: September 12, 2014

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chetan K. Jain and John B. Hare


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF KABIR ***




Produced by Chetan K. Jain and John B. Hare









SONGS OF KABÎR


Translated by Rabindranath Tagore

Introduction by Evelyn Underhill

New York, The Macmillan Company

1915




INTRODUCTION


The poet Kabîr, a selection from whose songs is here for the
first time offered to English readers, is one of the most
interesting personalities in the history of Indian mysticism.
Born in or near Benares, of Mohammedan parents, and probably
about the year 1440, he became in early life a disciple of the
celebrated Hindu ascetic Râmânanda.  Râmânanda had brought to
Northern India the religious revival which Râmânuja, the great
twelfth-century reformer of Brâhmanism, had initiated in the
South.  This revival was in part a reaction against the
increasing formalism of the orthodox cult, in part an assertion
of the demands of the heart as against the intense
intellectualism of the Vedânta philosophy, the exaggerated monism
which that philosophy proclaimed.  It took in Râmânuja's
preaching the form of an ardent personal devotion to the God
Vishnu, as representing the personal aspect of the Divine Nature:
that mystical "religion of love" which everywhere makes its
appearance at a certain level of spiritual culture, and which
creeds and philosophies are powerless to kill.

Though such a devotion is indigenous in Hinduism, and finds
expression in many passages of the Bhagavad Gîtâ, there was in
its mediæval revival a large element of syncretism.  Râmânanda,
through whom its spirit is said to have reached Kabîr, appears to
have been a man of wide religious culture, and full of missionary
enthusiasm.  Living at the moment in which the impassioned poetry
and deep philosophy of the great Persian mystics, Attâr, Sâdî,
Jalâlu'ddîn Rûmî, and Hâfiz, were exercising a powerful influence
on the religious thought of India, he dreamed of reconciling this
intense and personal Mohammedan mysticism with the traditional
theology of Brâhmanism.  Some have regarded both these great
religious leaders as influenced also by Christian thought and
life: but as this is a point upon which competent authorities
hold widely divergent views, its discussion is not attempted here.
We may safely assert, however, that in their teachings, two--perhaps
three--apparently antagonistic streams of intense
spiritual culture met, as Jewish and Hellenistic thought met in
the early Christian Church: and it is one of the outstanding
characteristics of Kabîr's genius that he was able in his poems
to fuse them into one.

A great religious reformer, the founder of a sect to which nearly
a million northern Hindus still belong, it is yet supremely as a
mystical poet that Kabîr lives for us.  His fate has been that of
many revealers of Reality.  A hater of religious exclusivism, and
seeking above all things to initiate men into the liberty of the
children of God, his followers have honoured his memory by
re-erecting in a new place the barriers which he laboured to cast
down.  But his wonderful songs survive, the spontaneous
expressions of his vision and his love; and it is by these, not
by the didactic teachings associated with his name, that he makes
his immortal appeal to the heart.  In these poems a wide range of
mystical emotion is brought into play: from the loftiest
abstractions, the most otherworldly passion for the Infinite, to
the most intimate and personal realization of God, expressed in
homely metaphors and religious symbols drawn indifferently from
Hindu and Mohammedan belief.  It is impossible to say of their
author that he was Brâhman or Sûfî, Vedântist or Vaishnavite.
He is, as he says himself, "at once the child of Allah and of Râm."
That Supreme Spirit Whom he knew and adored, and to Whose joyous
friendship he sought to induct the souls of other men, transcended
whilst He included all metaphysical categories, all credal
definitions; yet each contributed something to the description of
that Infinite and Simple Totality Who revealed Himself, according
to their measure, to the faithful lovers of all creeds.

Kabîr's story is surrounded by contradictory legends, on none of
which reliance can be placed.  Some of these emanate from a Hindu,
some from a Mohammedan source, and claim him by turns as a Sûfî
and a Brâhman saint.  His name, however, is practically a
conclusive proof of Moslem ancestry: and the most probable tale is
that which represents him as the actual or adopted child of a
Mohammedan weaver of Benares, the city in which the chief events
of his life took place.

In fifteenth-century Benares the syncretistic tendencies of
Bhakti religion had reached full development.  Sûfîs and Brâhmans
appear to have met in disputation: the most spiritual members of
both creeds frequenting the teachings of Râmânanda, whose
reputation was then at its height.  The boy Kabîr, in whom the
religious passion was innate, saw in Râmânanda his destined
teacher; but knew how slight were the chances that a Hindu guru
would accept a Mohammedan as disciple.  He therefore hid upon the
steps of the river Ganges, where Râmânanda was accustomed to
bathe; with the result that the master, coming down to the water,
trod upon his body unexpectedly, and exclaimed in his
astonishment, "Ram!  Ram!"--the name of the incarnation under
which he worshipped God.  Kabîr then declared that he had
received the mantra of initiation from Râmânanda's lips, and was
by it admitted to discipleship.  In spite of the protests of
orthodox Brâhmans and Mohammedans, both equally annoyed by this
contempt of theological landmarks, he persisted in his claim;
thus exhibiting in action that very principle of religious
synthesis which Râmânanda had sought to establish in thought.
Râmânanda appears to have accepted him, and though Mohammedan
legends speak of the famous Sûfî Pîr, Takkî of Jhansî, as Kabîr's
master in later life, the Hindu saint is the only human teacher
to whom in his songs he acknowledges indebtedness.

The little that we know of Kabîr's life contradicts many current
ideas concerning the Oriental mystic.  Of the stages of
discipline through which he passed, the manner in which his
spiritual genius developed, we are completely ignorant.  He seems
to have remained for years the disciple of Râmânanda, joining in
the theological and philosophical arguments which his master held
with all the great Mullahs and Brâhmans of his day; and to this
source we may perhaps trace his acquaintance with the terms of
Hindu and Sûfî philosophy.  He may or may not have submitted to
the traditional education of the Hindu or the Sûfî contemplative:
it is clear, at any rate, that he never adopted the life of the
professional ascetic, or retired from the world in order to
devote himself to bodily mortifications and the exclusive pursuit
of the contemplative life.  Side by side with his interior life
of adoration, its artistic expression in music and words--for he
was a skilled musician as well as a poet--he lived the sane and
diligent life of the Oriental craftsman.  All the legends agree
on this point: that Kabîr was a weaver, a simple and unlettered
man, who earned his living at the loom.  Like Paul the tentmaker,
Boehme the cobbler, Bunyan the tinker, Tersteegen the
ribbon-maker, he knew how to combine vision and industry; the
work of his hands helped rather than hindered the impassioned
meditation of his heart.  Hating mere bodily austerities, he was
no ascetic, but a married man, the father of a family--a
circumstance which Hindu legends of the monastic type vainly
attempt to conceal or explain--and it was from out of the heart
of the common life that he sang his rapturous lyrics of divine
love.  Here his works corroborate the traditional story of his
life.  Again and again he extols the life of home, the value and
reality of diurnal existence, with its opportunities for love and
renunciation; pouring contempt--upon the professional sanctity of
the Yogi, who "has a great beard and matted locks, and looks like
a goat," and on all who think it necessary to flee a world
pervaded by love, joy, and beauty--the proper theatre of man's
quest--in order to find that One Reality Who has "spread His form
of love throughout all the world." [Footnote: Cf. Poems Nos. XXI,
XL, XLIII, LXVI, LXXVI.]

It does not need much experience of ascetic literature to
recognize the boldness and originality of this attitude in such a
time and place.  From the point of view of orthodox sanctity,
whether Hindu or Mohammedan, Kabîr was plainly a heretic; and his
frank dislike of all institutional religion, all external
observance--which was as thorough and as intense as that of the
Quakers themselves--completed, so far as ecclesiastical opinion
was concerned, his reputation as a dangerous man.  The "simple
union" with Divine Reality which he perpetually extolled, as alike
the duty and the joy of every soul, was independent both of ritual
and of bodily austerities; the God whom he proclaimed was "neither
in Kaaba nor in Kailâsh."  Those who sought Him needed not to go
far; for He awaited discovery everywhere, more accessible to "the
washerwoman and the carpenter" than to the self--righteous holy man.
[Footnote: Poems I, II, XLI.]  Therefore the whole apparatus of
piety, Hindu and Moslem alike--the temple and mosque, idol and holy
water, scriptures and priests--were denounced by this inconveniently
clear-sighted poet as mere substitutes for reality; dead things
intervening between the soul and its love--

/*
  The images are all lifeless, they cannot speak:
    I know, for I have cried aloud to them.
  The Purâna and the Koran are mere words:
    lifting up the curtain, I have seen.
*/
[Footnote: Poems XLII, LXV, LXVII.]

This sort of thing cannot be tolerated by any organized church;
and it is not surprising that Kabîr, having his head-quarters in
Benares, the very centre of priestly influence, was subjected to
considerable persecution.  The well-known legend of the beautiful
courtesan sent by Brâhmans to tempt his virtue, and converted,
like the Magdalen, by her sudden encounter with the initiate of a
higher love, pre serves the memory of the fear and dislike with
which he was regarded by the ecclesiastical powers.  Once at
least, after the performance of a supposed miracle of healing, he
was brought before the Emperor Sikandar Lodi, and charged with
claiming the possession of divine powers.  But Sikandar Lodi, a
ruler of considerable culture, was tolerant of the eccentricities
of saintly persons belonging to his own faith.  Kabîr, being of
Mohammedan birth, was outside the authority of the Brâhmans, and
technically classed with the Sûfîs, to whom great theological
latitude was allowed.  Therefore, though he was banished in the
interests of peace from Benares, his life was spared.  This seems
to have happened in 1495, when he was nearly sixty years of age;
it is the last event in his career of which we have definite
knowledge.  Thenceforth he appears to have moved about amongst
various cities of northern India, the centre of a group of
disciples; continuing in exile that life of apostle and poet of
love to which, as he declares in one of his songs, he was destined
"from the beginning of time."  In 1518, an old man, broken in
health, and with hands so feeble that he could no longer make the
music which he loved, he died at Maghar near Gorakhpur.

A beautiful legend tells us that after his death his
Mohammedan and Hindu disciples disputed the possession of his
body; which the Mohammedans wished to bury, the Hindus to burn.
As they argued together, Kabîr appeared before them, and told
them to lift the shroud and look at that which lay beneath.  They
did so, and found in the place of the corpse a heap of flowers;
half of which were buried by the Mohammedans at Maghar, and half
carried by the Hindus to the holy city of Benares to be
burned--fitting conclusion to a life which had made fragrant the
most beautiful doctrines of two great creeds.



II


The poetry of mysticism might be defined on the one hand as a
temperamental reaction to the vision of Reality: on the other, as
a form of prophecy.  As it is the special vocation of the
mystical consciousness to mediate between two orders, going out
in loving adoration towards God and coming home to tell the
secrets of Eternity to other men; so the artistic self-expression
of this consciousness has also a double character.  It is
love-poetry, but love-poetry which is often written with a missionary
intention.

Kabîr's songs are of this kind: out-births at once of rapture and
of charity.  Written in the popular Hindi, not in the literary
tongue, they were deliberately addressed--like the vernacular
poetry of Jacopone da Todì and Richard Rolle--to the people rather
than to the professionally religious class; and all must be struck
by the constant employment in them of imagery drawn from the
common life, the universal experience.  It is by the simplest
metaphors, by constant appeals to needs, passions, relations which
all men understand--the bridegroom and bride, the guru and
disciple, the pilgrim, the farmer, the migrant bird-- that he
drives home his intense conviction of the reality of the soul's
intercourse with the Transcendent.  There are in his universe no
fences between the "natural" and "supernatural" worlds; everything
is a part of the creative Play of God, and therefore--even in its
humblest details--capable of revealing the Player's mind.

This willing acceptance of the here-and-now as a means of
representing supernal realities is a trait common to the greatest
mystics.  For them, when they have achieved at last the true
theopathetic state, all aspects of the universe possess equal
authority as sacramental declarations of the Presence of God; and
their fearless employment of homely and physical symbols--often
startling and even revolting to the unaccustomed taste--is in
direct proportion to the exaltation of their spiritual life.  The
works of the great Sûfîs, and amongst the Christians of Jacopone
da Todì, Ruysbroeck, Boehme, abound in illustrations of this law.
Therefore we must not be surprised to find in Kabîr's songs--his
desperate attempts to communicate his ecstasy and persuade other
men to share it--a constant juxtaposition of concrete and
metaphysical language; swift alternations between the most
intensely anthropomorphic, the most subtly philosophical, ways of
apprehending man's communion with the Divine.  The need for this
alternation, and its entire naturalness for the mind which
employs it, is rooted in his concept, or vision, of the Nature of
God; and unless we make some attempt to grasp this, we shall not
go far in our understanding of his poems.

Kabîr belongs to that small group of supreme mystics--amongst
whom St.  Augustine, Ruysbroeck, and the Sûfî poet Jalâlu'ddîn
Rûmî are perhaps the chief--who have achieved that which we might
call the synthetic vision of God.  These have resolved the
perpetual opposition between the personal and impersonal, the
transcendent and immanent, static and dynamic aspects of the
Divine Nature; between the Absolute of philosophy and the "sure
true Friend" of devotional religion.  They have done this, not by
taking these apparently incompatible concepts one after the
other; but by ascending to a height of spiritual intuition at
which they are, as Ruysbroeck said, "melted and merged in the
Unity," and perceived as the completing opposites of a perfect
Whole.  This proceeding entails for them--and both Kabîr and
Ruysbroeck expressly acknowledge it--a universe of three orders:
Becoming, Being, and that which is "More than Being," i.e., God.
[Footnote: Nos. VII and XLIX.]  God is here felt to be not the
final abstraction, but the one actuality.  He inspires, supports,
indeed inhabits, both the durational, conditioned, finite world
of Becoming and the unconditioned, non-successional, infinite
world of Being; yet utterly transcends them both.  He is the
omnipresent Reality, the "All-pervading" within Whom "the worlds
are being told like beads."  In His personal aspect He is the
"beloved Fakir," teaching and companioning each soul.  Considered
as Immanent Spirit, He is "the Mind within the mind."  But all
these are at best partial aspects of His nature, mutually
corrective: as the Persons in the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity--to which this theological diagram bears a striking
resemblance--represent different and compensating experiences of
the Divine Unity within which they are resumed.  As Ruysbroeck
discerned a plane of reality upon which "we can speak no more of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, but only of One Being, the very
substance of the Divine Persons"; so Kabîr says that "beyond both
the limited and the limitless is He, the Pure Being."  [Footnote:
No. VII.]

Brahma, then, is the Ineffable Fact compared with which "the
distinction of the Conditioned from the Unconditioned is but a
word": at once the utterly transcendent One of Absolutist
philosophy, and the personal Lover of the individual
soul--"common to all and special to each," as one Christian mystic
has it.  The need felt by Kabîr for both these ways of describing
Reality is a proof of the richness and balance of his spiritual
experience; which neither cosmic nor anthropomorphic symbols,
taken alone, could express.  More absolute than the Absolute,
more personal than the human mind, Brahma therefore exceeds
whilst He includes all the concepts of philosophy, all the
passionate intuitions of the heart.  He is the Great Affirmation,
the font of energy, the source of life and love, the unique
satisfaction of desire.  His creative word is the _Om_ or
"Everlasting Yea."  The negative philosophy which strips from the
Divine Nature all Its attributes and defining Him only by that
which He is not--reduces Him to an "Emptiness," is abhorrent to
this most vital of poets.--Brahma, he says, "may never be found
in abstractions."  He is the One Love who Pervades the world.,
discerned in His fullness only by the eyes of love; and those who
know Him thus share, though they may never tell, the joyous and
ineffable secret of the universe.  [Footnote: Nos. VII, XXVI,
LXXVI, XC.]

Now Kabîr, achieving this synthesis between the personal and
cosmic aspects of the Divine Nature, eludes the three great
dangers which threaten mystical religion.

First, he escapes the excessive emotionalism, the tendency to
an exclusively anthropomorphic devotion, which results from an
unrestricted cult of Divine Personality, especially under an
incarnational form; seen in India in the exaggerations of
Krishna worship, in Europe in the sentimental extravagances of
certain Christian saints.

Next, he is protected from the soul-destroying conclusions of
pure monism, inevitable if its logical implications are pressed
home: that is, the identity of substance between God and the
soul, with its corollary of the total absorption of that soul in
the Being of God as the goal of the spiritual life.  For the
thorough-going monist the soul, in so far as it is real, is
substantially identical with God; and the true object of
existence is the making patent of this latent identity, the
realization which finds expression in the Vedântist formula "That
art thou."  But Kabîr says that Brahma and the creature are "ever
distinct, yet ever united"; that the wise man knows the spiritual
as well as the material world to "be no more than His footstool."
[Footnote: Nos. VII and IX.]  The soul's union with Him is a love
union, a mutual inhabitation; that essentially dualistic relation
which all mystical religion expresses, not a self-mergence which
leaves no place for personality.  This eternal distinction, the
mysterious union-in-separateness of God and the soul, is a
necessary doctrine of all sane mysticism; for no scheme which
fails to find a place for it can represent more than a fragment of
that soul's intercourse with the spiritual world.  Its affirmation
was one of the distinguishing features of the Vaishnavite
reformation preached by Râmânuja; the principle of which had
descended through Râmânanda to Kabîr.

Last, the warmly human and direct apprehension of God as the
supreme Object of love, the soul's comrade, teacher, and
bridegroom, which is so passionately and frequently expressed in
Kabîr's poems, balances and controls those abstract tendencies
which are inherent in the metaphysical side of his vision of
Reality: and prevents it from degenerating into that sterile
worship of intellectual formulæ which became the curse of the
Vedântist school.  For the mere intellectualist, as for the mere
pietist, he has little approbation.  [Footnote: Cf. especially
Nos. LIX, LXVII, LXXV, XC, XCI.]  Love is throughout his
"absolute sole Lord": the unique source of the more abundant life
which he enjoys, and the common factor which unites the finite
and infinite worlds.  All is soaked in love: that love which he
described in almost Johannine language as the "Form of God."
The whole of creation is the Play of the Eternal Lover; the
living, changing, growing expression of Brahma's love and joy.
As these twin passions preside over the generation of human life,
so "beyond the mists of pleasure and pain" Kabîr finds them
governing the creative acts of God.  His manifestation is love;
His activity is joy.  Creation springs from one glad act of
affirmation: the Everlasting Yea, perpetually uttered within the
depths of the Divine Nature.  [Footnote: Nos. XVII, XXVI, LXXVI,
LXXXII.]  In accordance with this concept of the universe as a
Love-Game which eternally goes forward, a progressive
manifestation of Brahma--one of the many notions which he adopted
from the common stock of Hindu religious ideas, and illuminated
by his poetic genius--movement, rhythm, perpetual change, forms
an integral part of Kabîr's vision of Reality.  Though the
Eternal and Absolute is ever present to his consciousness, yet
his concept of the Divine Nature is essentially dynamic.  It is
by the symbols of motion that he most often tries to convey it to
us: as in his constant reference to dancing, or the strangely
modern picture of that Eternal Swing of the Universe which is
"held by the cords of love."  [Footnote: No. XVI.]

It is a marked characteristic of mystical literature that the
great contemplatives, in their effort to convey to us the nature
of their communion with the supersensuous, are inevitably driven
to employ some form of sensuous imagery: coarse and inaccurate as
they know such imagery to be, even at the best.  Our normal human
consciousness is so completely committed to dependence on the
senses, that the fruits of intuition itself are instinctively
referred to them.  In that intuition it seems to the mystics that
all the dim cravings and partial apprehensions of sense find
perfect fulfilment.  Hence their constant declaration that they
_see_ the uncreated light, they _hear_ the celestial
melody, they _taste_ the sweetness of the Lord, they know an
ineffable fragrance, they feel the very contact of love.  "Him
verily seeing and fully feeling, Him spiritually hearing and Him
delectably smelling and sweetly swallowing," as Julian of Norwich
has it.  In those amongst them who develop psycho-sensorial
automatisms, these parallels between sense and spirit may present
themselves to consciousness in the form of hallucinations: as the
light seen by Suso, the music heard by Rolle, the celestial
perfumes which filled St.  Catherine of Siena's cell, the physical
wounds felt by St.  Francis and St. Teresa.  These are excessive
dramatizations of the symbolism under which the mystic tends
instinctively to represent his spiritual intuition to the surface
consciousness.  Here, in the special sense-perception which he
feels to be most expressive of Reality, his peculiar
idiosyncrasies come out.

Now Kabîr, as we might expect in one whose reactions to the
spiritual order were so wide and various, uses by turn all the
symbols of sense.  He tells us that he has "seen without sight"
the effulgence of Brahma, tasted the divine nectar, felt the
ecstatic contact of Reality, smelt the fragrance of the heavenly
flowers.  But he was essentially a poet and musician: rhythm and
harmony were to him the garments of beauty and truth.  Hence in
his lyrics he shows himself to be, like Richard Rolle, above all
things a musical mystic.  Creation, he says again and again, is
full of music: it _is_ music.  At the heart of the Universe
"white music is blossoming": love weaves the melody, whilst
renunciation beats the time.  It can be heard in the home as well
as in the heavens; discerned by the ears of common men as well as
by the trained senses of the ascetic.  Moreover, the body of
every man is a lyre on which Brahma, "the source of all music,"
plays.  Everywhere Kabîr discerns the "Unstruck Music of the
Infinite"--that celestial melody which the angel played to St.
Francis, that ghostly symphony which filled the soul of Rolle
with ecstatic joy.  [Footnote: Nos. XVII, XVIII, XXXIX, XLI, LIV,
LXXVI, LXXXIII, LXXXIX, XCVII.]  The one figure which he adopts
from the Hindu Pantheon and constantly uses, is that of Krishna
the Divine Flute Player.  [Footnote: Nos. L, LIII, LXVIII.]  He
sees the supernal music, too, in its visual embodiment, as
rhythmical movement: that mysterious dance of the universe before
the face of Brahma, which is at once an act of worship and an
expression of the infinite rapture of the Immanent God.'

Yet in this wide and rapturous vision of the universe Kabîr
never loses touch with diurnal existence, never forgets the
common life.  His feet are firmly planted upon earth; his lofty
and passionate apprehensions are perpetually controlled by the
activity of a sane and vigorous intellect, by the alert
commonsense so often found in persons of real mystical genius.
The constant insistence on simplicity and directness, the hatred
of all abstractions and philosophizings,[Footnote: Nos. XXVI,
XXXII, LXXVI] the ruthless criticism of external religion: these
are amongst his most marked characteristics.  God is the Root
whence all manifestations, "material" and "spiritual," alike
proceed; [Footnote: Nos. LXXV, LXXVIII, LXXX, XC.] and God is
the only need of man--"happiness shall be yours when you come to
the Root."  [Footnote: No. LXXX.]  Hence to those who keep their
eye on the "one thing needful," denominations, creeds, ceremonies,
the conclusions of philosophy, the disciplines of asceticism, are
matters of comparative indifference.  They represent merely the
different angles from which the soul may approach that simple
union with Brahma which is its goal; and are useful only in so
faras they contribute to this consummation.  So thorough-going is
Kabîr's eclecticism, that he seems by turns Vedântist and
Vaishnavite, Pantheist and Transcendentalist, Brâhman and Sûfî.
In the effort to tell the truth about that ineffable apprehension,
so vast and yet so near, which controls his life, he seizes and
twines together--as he might have woven together contrasting
threads upon his loom--symbols and ideas drawn from the most
violent and conflicting philosophies and faiths.  All are needed,
if he is ever to suggest the character of that One whom the
Upanishad called "the Sun-coloured Being who is beyond this
Darkness": as all the colours of the spectrum are needed if we
would demonstrate the simple richness of white light.  In thus
adapting traditional materials to his own use he follows a method
common amongst the mystics; who seldom exhibit any special love
for originality of form.  They will pour their wine into almost
any vessel that comes to hand: generally using by preference--and
lifting to new levels of beauty and significance--the religious or
philosophic formulæ current in their own day.  Thus we find that
some of Kabîr's finest poems have as their subjects the
commonplaces of Hindu philosophy and religion: the Lîlâ or Sport of
God, the Ocean of Bliss, the Bird of the Soul, Mâyâ, the Hundred-petalled
Lotus, and the "Formless Form."  Many, again, are soaked
in Sûfî imagery and feeling.  Others use as their material the
ordinary surroundings and incidents of Indian life: the temple bells,
the ceremony of the lamps, marriage, suttee, pilgrimage, the
characters of the seasons; all felt by him in their mystical aspect,
as sacraments of the soul's relation with Brahma.  In many of these
a particularly beautiful and intimate feeling for Nature is shown.
[Footnote: Nos. XV, XXIII, LXVII, LXXXVII, XCVII.]

In the collection of songs here translated there will be found
examples which illustrate nearly every aspect of Kabîr's thought,
and all the fluctuations of the mystic's emotion: the ecstasy,
the despair, the still beatitude, the eager self-devotion, the
flashes of wide illumination, the moments of intimate love.  His
wide and deep vision of the universe, the "Eternal Sport" of
creation (LXXXII), the worlds being "told like beads" within the
Being of God (XIV, XVI, XVII, LXXVI), is here seen balanced by
his lovely and delicate sense of intimate communion with the
Divine Friend, Lover, Teacher of the soul (X, XI, XXIII, XXXV, LI,
LXXXV, LXXXVI, LXXXVIII, XCII, XCIII; above all, the beautiful
poem XXXIV).  As these apparently paradoxical views of Reality
are resolved in Brâhma, so all other opposites are reconciled in
Him: bondage and liberty, love and renunciation, pleasure and pain
(XVII, XXV, XL, LXXIX).  Union with Him is the one thing that
matters to the soul, its destiny and its need (LI, I, II, LIV, LXX,
LXXIV, XCIII, XCVI); and this union, this discovery of God, is the
simplest and most natural of all things, if we would but grasp it
(XLI, XLVI, LVI, LXXII, LXXVI, LXXVIII, XCVII).  The union, however,
is brought about by love, not by knowledge or ceremonial observances
(XXXVIII, LIV, LV, LIX, XCI); and the apprehension which that union
confers is ineffable--"neither This nor That," as Ruysbroeck has it
(IX, XLVI, LXXVI).  Real worship and communion is in Spirit and in
Truth (XL, XLI, LVI, LXIII, LXV, LXX), therefore idolatry is an
insult to the Divine Lover (XLII, LXIX) and the devices of
professional sanctity are useless apart from charity and purity
of soul (LIV, LXV, LXVI).  Since all things, and especially the
heart of man, are God-inhabited, God-possessed (XXVI, LVI, LXXVI,
LXXXIX, XCVII), He may best be found in the here-and-now: in the
normal.  human, bodily existence, the "mud" of material life (III,
IV, VI, XXI, XXXIX, XL, XLIII, XLVIII, LXXII).  "We can reach the
goal without crossing the road" (LXXVI)--not the cloister but the
home is the proper theatre of man's efforts: and if he cannot find
God there, he need not hope for success by going farther afield.
"In the home is reality."  There love and detachment, bondage and
freedom, joy and pain play by turns upon the soul; and it is from
their conflict that the Unstruck Music of the Infinite proceeds.
Kabîr says: "None but Brahma can evoke its melodies."

"This version of Kabîr's songs is chiefly the work of
Mr. Rabîndranâth Tagore, the trend of whose mystical genius makes
him--as all who read these poems will see--a peculiarly
sympathetic interpreter of Kabîr's vision and thought.  It has
been based upon the printed Hindî text with Bengali translation
of Mr. Kshiti Mohan Sen; who has gathered from many sources--sometimes
from books and manuscripts, sometimes from the lips of
wandering ascetics and minstrels--a large collection of poems
and hymns to which Kabîr's name is attached, and carefully
sifted the authentic songs from the many spurious works now
attributed to him.  These painstaking labours alone have made
the present undertaking possible.

We have also had before us a manuscript English translation of
116 songs made by Mr. Ajit Kumâr Chakravarty from Mr. Kshiti
Mohan Sen's text, and a prose essay upon Kabîr from the same
hand.  From these we have derived great assistance.  A
considerable number of readings from the translation have been
adopted by us; whilst several of the facts mentioned in the essay
have been incorporated into this introduction.  Our most grateful
thanks are due to Mr. Ajit Kumar Chakravarty for the extremely
generous and unselfish manner in which he has placed his work at
our disposal.

E.  U.

The reference of the headlines of the poems is to:

Sântiniketana; Kabîr by Srî Kshitimohan Sen, 4 parts,
Brahmacharyâsrama, Bolpur, 1910-1911.


For some assistance in normalizing the transliteration we are
indebted to Professor J. F. Blumhardt.





KABIR'S POEMS


  I


  I.  13.  _mo ko kahân dhûnro bande_

  O servant, where dost thou seek Me?
  Lo!  I am beside thee.
  I am neither in temple nor in mosque: I am neither in Kaaba nor
    in Kailash:
  Neither am I in rites and ceremonies, nor in Yoga and
    renunciation.
  If thou art a true seeker, thou shalt at once see Me: thou shalt
    meet Me in a moment of time.
  Kabîr says, "O Sadhu!  God is the breath of all breath."



  II


  I. 16. _Santan jât na pûcho nirguniyân_

  It is needless to ask of a saint the caste to which he belongs;
  For the priest, the warrior.  the tradesman, and all the
    thirty-six castes, alike are seeking for God.
  It is but folly to ask what the caste of a saint may be;
  The barber has sought God, the washerwoman, and the carpenter--
  Even Raidas was a seeker after God.
  The Rishi Swapacha was a tanner by caste.
  Hindus and Moslems alike have achieved that End, where remains no
    mark of distinction.



  III


  I. 57. _sâdho bhâî, jîval hî karo âs'â_

  O friend!  hope for Him whilst you live, know whilst you live,
    understand whilst you live: for in life deliverance abides.
  If your bonds be not broken whilst living, what hope of
    deliverance in death?
  It is but an empty dream, that the soul shall have union with Him
    because it has passed from the body:
  If He is found now, He is found then,
  If not, we do but go to dwell in the City of Death.
  If you have union now, you shall have it hereafter.
  Bathe in the truth, know the true Guru, have faith in the true
    Name!
  Kabîr says: "It is the Spirit of the quest which helps; I am the
  slave of this Spirit of the quest."



  IV


  I. 58. _bâgo nâ jâ re nâ jâ_

  Do not go to the garden of flowers!
  O Friend! go not there;
  In your body is the garden of flowers.
  Take your seat on the thousand petals of the lotus, and there
    gaze on the Infinite Beauty.



  V


  I. 63. _avadhû, mâyâ tajî na jây_

  Tell me, Brother, how can I renounce Maya?
  When I gave up the tying of ribbons, still I tied my garment
    about me:
  When I gave up tying my garment, still I covered my body in its
    folds.
  So, when I give up passion, I see that anger remains;
  And when I renounce anger, greed is with me still;
  And when greed is vanquished, pride and vainglory remain;
  When the mind is detached and casts Maya away, still it clings to
    the letter.
  Kabîr says, "Listen to me, dear Sadhu!  the true path is rarely
    found."



  VI


  I. 83. _candâ jhalkai yahi ghat mâhîn_

  The moon shines in my body, but my blind eyes cannot see it:
  The moon is within me, and so is the sun.
  The unstruck drum of Eternity is sounded within me; but my deaf
    ears cannot hear it.

  So long as man clamours for the _I_ and the _Mine_,
    his works are as naught:
  When all love of the _I_ and the _Mine_ is dead, then
    the work of the Lord is done.
  For work has no other aim than the getting of knowledge:
  When that comes, then work is put away.

  The flower blooms for the fruit: when the fruit comes, the flower
    withers.
  The musk is in the deer, but it seeks it not within itself: it
    wanders in quest of grass.



  VII


  I. 85. _Sâdho, Brahm alakh lakhâyâ_

  When He Himself reveals Himself, Brahma brings into manifestation
    That which can never be seen.
  As the seed is in the plant, as the shade is in the tree, as the
    void is in the sky, as infinite forms are in the void--
  So from beyond the Infinite, the Infinite comes; and from the
    Infinite the finite extends.

  The creature is in Brahma, and Brahma is in the creature: they
    are ever distinct, yet ever united.
  He Himself is the tree, the seed, and the germ.
  He Himself is the flower, the fruit, and the shade.
  He Himself is the sun, the light, and the lighted.
  He Himself is Brahma, creature, and Maya.
  He Himself is the manifold form, the infinite space;
  He is the breath, the word, and the meaning.
  He Himself is the limit and the limitless: and beyond both the
    limited and the limitless is He, the Pure Being.
  He is the Immanent Mind in Brahma and in the creature.

  The Supreme Soul is seen within the soul,
  The Point is seen within the Supreme Soul,
  And within the Point, the reflection is seen again.
  Kabîr is blest because he has this supreme vision!



  VIII


  I. 101. _is ghat antar bâg bagîce_

  Within this earthen vessel are bowers and groves, and within it
    is the Creator:
  Within this vessel are the seven oceans and the unnumbered stars.
  The touchstone and the jewel-appraiser are within;
  And within this vessel the Eternal soundeth, and the spring wells
    up.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, my Friend!  My beloved Lord is within."



  IX


  I. 104. _aisâ lo nahîn taisâ lo_

  O How may I ever express that secret word?
  O how can I say He is not like this, and He is like that?
  If I say that He is within me, the universe is ashamed:
  If I say that He is without me, it is falsehood.
  He makes the inner and the outer worlds to be indivisibly one;
  The conscious and the unconscious, both are His footstools.
  He is neither manifest nor hidden, He is neither revealed nor
    unrevealed:
  There are no words to tell that which He is.



  X


  I. 121. _tohi mori lagan lagâye re phakîr wâ_

  To Thee Thou hast drawn my love, O Fakir!
  I was sleeping in my own chamber, and Thou didst awaken me;
    striking me with Thy voice, O Fakir!
  I was drowning in the deeps of the ocean of this world, and
    Thou didst save me: upholding me with Thine arm, O Fakir!
  Only one word and no second--and Thou hast made me tear off all
    my bonds, O Fakir!
  Kabîr says, "Thou hast united Thy heart to my heart, O Fakir!"



  XI


  I. 131. _nis' din khelat rahî sakhiyân sang_

  I played day and night with my comrades, and now I am greatly
    afraid.
  So high is my Lord's palace, my heart trembles to mount its
    stairs: yet I must not be shy, if I would enjoy His love.
  My heart must cleave to my Lover; I must withdraw my veil, and
    meet Him with all my body:
  Mine eyes must perform the ceremony of the lamps of love.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, friend: he understands who loves.  If
    you feel not love's longing for your Beloved One, it is vain
    to adorn your body, vain to put unguent on your eyelids."



  XII


  II. 24. _hamsâ, kaho purâtan vât_

  Tell me, O Swan, your ancient tale.
  From what land do you come, O Swan? to what shore will you fly?
  Where would you take your rest, O Swan, and what do you seek?

  Even this morning, O Swan, awake, arise, follow me!
  There is a land where no doubt nor sorrow have rule: where the
    terror of Death is no more.
  There the woods of spring are a-bloom, and the fragrant scent "He
    is I" is borne on the wind:
  There the bee of the heart is deeply immersed, and desires no
    other joy.



  XIII


  II. 37. _angadhiyâ devâ_

  O Lord Increate, who will serve Thee?
  Every votary offers his worship to the God of his own creation:
    each day he receives service--
  None seek Him, the Perfect: Brahma, the Indivisible Lord.
  They believe in ten Avatars; but no Avatar can be the Infinite
    Spirit, for he suffers the results of his deeds:
  The Supreme One must be other than this.
  The Yogi, the Sanyasi, the Ascetics, are disputing one with
    another:
  Kabîr says, "O brother!  he who has seen that radiance of love,
    he is saved."



  XIV


  II. 56. _dariyâ kî lahar dariyâo hai jî_

  The river and its waves are one
  surf: where is the difference between the river and its waves?
  When the wave rises, it is the water; and when it falls, it is
    the same water again.  Tell me, Sir, where is the distinction?
  Because it has been named as wave, shall it no longer be
    considered as water?

  Within the Supreme Brahma, the worlds are being told like beads:
  Look upon that rosary with the eyes of wisdom.



  XV


  II. 57. _jânh khelat vasant riturâj_

  Where Spring, the lord of the seasons, reigneth, there the
    Unstruck Music sounds of itself,
  There the streams of light flow in all directions;
  Few are the men who can cross to that shore!
  There, where millions of Krishnas stand with hands folded,
  Where millions of Vishnus bow their heads,
  Where millions of Brahmâs are reading the Vedas,
  Where millions of Shivas are lost in contemplation,
  Where millions of Indras dwell in the sky,
  Where the demi-gods and the munis are unnumbered,
  Where millions of Saraswatis, Goddess of Music, play on the vina--
  There is my Lord self-revealed: and the scent of sandal and
    flowers dwells in those deeps.



  XVI


  II. 59. _jânh, cet acet khambh dôû_

  Between the poles of the conscious and the unconscious, there has
    the mind made a swing:
  Thereon hang all beings and all worlds, and that swing never
    ceases its sway.
  Millions of beings are there: the sun and the moon in their
    courses are there:
  Millions of ages pass, and the swing goes on.
  All swing! the sky and the earth and the air and the water; and
    the Lord Himself taking form:
  And the sight of this has made Kabîr a servant.



  XVII


  II. 61. _grah candra tapan jot varat hai_

  The light of the sun, the moon, and the stars shines bright:
  The melody of love swells forth, and the rhythm of love's
    detachment beats the time.
  Day and night, the chorus of music fills the heavens; and Kabîr
    says
  "My Beloved One gleams like the lightning flash in the sky."

  Do you know how the moments perform their adoration?
  Waving its row of lamps, the universe sings in worship day and
    night,
  There are the hidden banner and the secret canopy:
  There the sound of the unseen bells is heard.
  Kabîr says: "There adoration never ceases; there the Lord of the
    Universe sitteth on His throne."
  The whole world does its works and commits its errors: but few
    are the lovers who know the Beloved.
  The devout seeker is he who mingles in his heart the double
    currents of love and detachment, like the mingling of the
    streams of Ganges and Jumna;
  In his heart the sacred water flows day and night; and thus the
    round of births and deaths is brought to an end.

  Behold what wonderful rest is in the Supreme Spirit!  and he
    enjoys it, who makes himself meet for it.
  Held by the cords of love, the swing of the Ocean of Joy sways to
    and fro; and a mighty sound breaks forth in song.
  See what a lotus blooms there without water!  and Kabîr says
  "My heart's bee drinks its nectar."
  What a wonderful lotus it is, that blooms at the heart of the
    spinning wheel of the universe!  Only a few pure souls know of
    its true delight.
  Music is all around it, and there the heart partakes of the joy
  of the Infinite Sea.
  Kabîr says: "Dive thou into that Ocean of sweetness: thus let all
    errors of life and of death flee away."

  Behold how the thirst of the five senses is quenched there!  and
    the three forms of misery are no more!
  Kabîr says: "It is the sport of the Unattainable One: look
    within, and behold how the moon-beams of that Hidden One shine
    in you."
  There falls the rhythmic beat of life and death:
  Rapture wells forth, and all space is radiant with light.
  There the Unstruck Music is sounded; it is the music of the love
    of the three worlds.
  There millions of lamps of sun and of moon are burning;
  There the drum beats, and the lover swings in play.
  There love-songs resound, and light rains in showers; and the
    worshipper is entranced in the taste of the heavenly nectar.
  Look upon life and death; there is no separation between them,
  The right hand and the left hand are one and the same.
  Kabîr says: "There the wise man is speechless; for this truth may
    never be found in Vadas or in books."

  I have had my Seat on the Self-poised One,
  I have drunk of the Cup of the Ineffable,
  I have found the Key of the Mystery,
  I have reached the Root of Union.
  Travelling by no track, I have come to the Sorrowless Land: very
    easily has the mercy of the great Lord come upon me.
  They have sung of Him as infinite and unattainable: but I in my
    meditations have seen Him without sight.
  That is indeed the sorrowless land, and none know the path that
    leads there:
  Only he who is on that path has surely transcended all sorrow.
  Wonderful is that land of rest, to which no merit can win;
  It is the wise who has seen it, it is the wise who has sung of
    it.
  This is the Ultimate Word: but can any express its marvellous
    savour?
  He who has savoured it once, he knows what joy it can give.
  Kabîr says: "Knowing it, the ignorant man becomes wise, and the
    wise man becomes speechless and silent,
  The worshipper is utterly inebriated,
  His wisdom and his detachment are made perfect;
  He drinks from the cup of the inbreathings and the outbreathings
    of love."

  There the whole sky is filled with sound, and there that music is
    made without fingers and without strings;
  There the game of pleasure and pain does not cease.
  Kabîr says: "If you merge your life in the Ocean of Life, you
    will find your life in the Supreme Land of Bliss."

  What a frenzy of ecstasy there is in every hour! and the
    worshipper is pressing out and drinking the essence of the
    hours: he lives in the life of Brahma.
  I speak truth, for I have accepted truth in life; I am now
    attached to truth, I have swept all tinsel away.
  Kabîr says: "Thus is the worshipper set free from fear; thus have
    all errors of life and of death left him."

  There the sky is filled with music:
  There it rains nectar:
  There the harp-strings jingle, and there the drums beat.
  What a secret splendour is there, in the mansion of the sky!
  There no mention is made of the rising and the setting of the
    sun;
  In the ocean of manifestation, which is the light of love, day
    and night are felt to be one.
  Joy for ever, no sorrow,--no struggle!
  There have I seen joy filled to the brim, perfection of joy;
  No place for error is there.
  Kabîr says: "There have I witnessed the sport of One Bliss!"

  I have known in my body the sport of the universe: I have escaped
    from the error of this world..
  The inward and the outward are become as one sky, the Infinite
    and the finite are united: I am drunken with the sight of this
    All!
  This Light of Thine fulfils the universe: the lamp of love that
    burns on the salver of knowledge.
  Kabîr says: "There error cannot enter, and the conflict of life
    and death is felt no more."



  XVIII


  II. 77. _maddh âkas' âp jahân baithe_

  The middle region of the sky, wherein the spirit dwelleth, is
    radiant with the music of light;
  There, where the pure and white music blossoms, my Lord takes His
    delight.
  In the wondrous effulgence of each hair of His body, the
    brightness of millions of suns and of moons is lost.
  On that shore there is a city, where the rain of nectar pours and
    pours, and never ceases.
  Kabîr says: "Come, O Dharmadas!  and see my great Lord's Durbar."



  XIX


  II. 20. _paramâtam guru nikat virâjatn_

  O my heart!  the Supreme Spirit, the great Master, is near you:
    wake, oh wake!
  Run to the feet of your Beloved: for your Lord stands near to your
    head.
  You have slept for unnumbered ages; this morning will you not
    wake?



  XX


  II. 22. _man tu pâr utar kânh jaiho_

  To what shore would you cross, O my heart?  there is no traveller
    before you, there is no road:
  Where is the movement, where is the rest, on that shore?
  There is no water; no boat, no boatman, is there;
  There is not so much as a rope to tow the boat, nor a man to draw
    it.
  No earth, no sky, no time, no thing, is there: no shore, no ford!
  There, there is neither body nor mind: and where is the place
    that shall still the thirst of the soul?  You shall find naught
    in that emptiness.
  Be strong, and enter into your own body: for there your foothold
    is firm.  Consider it well, O my heart! go not elsewhere,
  Kabîr says: "Put all imaginations away, and stand fast in that
    which you are."



  XXI


  II. 33. _ghar ghar dîpak barai_

  Lamps burn in every house, O blind one! and you cannot see them.
  One day your eyes shall suddenly be opened, and you shall see:
    and the fetters of death will fall from you.
  There is nothing to say or to hear, there is nothing to do: it is
    he who is living, yet dead, who shall never die again.

  Because he lives in solitude, therefore the Yogi says that his
    home is far away.
  Your Lord is near: yet you are climbing the palm-tree to seek
    Him.
  The Brâhman priest goes from house to house and initiates people
    into faith:
  Alas!  the true fountain of life is beside you., and you have set
    up a stone to worship.
  Kabîr says: "I may never express how sweet my Lord is.  Yoga and
    the telling of beads, virtue and vice--these are naught to Him."



  XXII


  II. 38. _Sâdho, so satgur mohi bhâwai_

  O brother, my heart yearns for that true Guru, who fills the cup
    of true love, and drinks of it himself, and offers it then to
    me.
  He removes the veil from the eyes, and gives the true Vision of
    Brahma:
  He reveals the worlds in Him, and makes me to hear the Unstruck
    Music:
  He shows joy and sorrow to be one:
  He fills all utterance with love.
  Kabîr says: "Verily he has no fear, who has such a Guru to lead
    him to the shelter of safety!"



  XXIII


  II. 40. _tinwir sâñjh kâ gahirâ âwai_

  The shadows of evening fall thick and deep, and the darkness of
    love envelops the body and the mind.
  Open the window to the west, and be lost in the sky of love;
  Drink the sweet honey that steeps the petals of the lotus of the
    heart.
  Receive the waves in your body: what splendour is in the region
    of the sea!
  Hark!  the sounds of conches and bells are rising.
  Kabîr says: "O brother, behold!  the Lord is in this vessel of my
    body."



  XXIV


  II. 48. _jis se rahani apâr jagat men_

  More than all else do I cherish at heart that love which makes me
    to live a limitless life in this world.
  It is like the lotus, which lives in the water and blooms in the
    water: yet the water cannot touch its petals, they open beyond
    its reach.
  It is like a wife, who enters the fire at the bidding of love.
    She burns and lets others grieve, yet never dishonours love.
  This ocean of the world is hard to cross: its waters are very
    deep.  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, O Sadhu! few there are who
    have reached its end."



  XXV


  II. 45. _Hari ne apnâ âp chipâyâ_

  My Lord hides Himself, and my Lord wonderfully reveals Himself:
  My Lord has encompassed me with hardness, and my Lord has cast
    down my limitations.
  My Lord brings to me words of sorrow and words of joy, and He
    Himself heals their strife.
  I will offer my body and mind to my Lord: I will give up my life,
    but never can I forget my Lord!



  XXVI


  II. 75. _ônkâr siwae kôî sirjai_

  All things are created by the Om;
  The love-form is His body.
  He is without form, without quality, without decay:
  Seek thou union with Him!
  But that formless God takes a thousand forms in the eyes of His
    creatures:
  He is pure and indestructible,
  His form is infinite and fathomless,
  He dances in rapture, and waves of form arise from His dance.
  The body and the mind cannot contain themselves, when they are
    touched by His great joy.
  He is immersed in all consciousness, all joys, and all sorrows;
  He has no beginning and no end;
  He holds all within His bliss.



  XXVII


  II. 81. _satgur sôî dayâ kar dînhâ_

  It is the mercy of my true Guru that has made me to know the
    unknown;
  I have learned from Him how to walk without feet, to see without
    eyes, to hear without ears, to drink without mouth, to fly
    without wings;
  I have brought my love and my meditation into the land where
    there is no sun and moon, nor day and night.
  Without eating, I have tasted of the sweetness of nectar; and
    without water, I have quenched my thirst.
  Where there is the response of delight, there is the fullness of
    joy.  Before whom can that joy be uttered?
  Kabîr says: "The Guru is great beyond words, and great is the
    good fortune of the disciple."



  XXVIII


  II. 85. _nirgun âge sargun nâcai_

  Before the Unconditioned, the Conditioned dances: "Thou and I are
    one!" this trumpet proclaims.
  The Guru comes, and bows down before the disciple:
  This is the greatest of wonders.



  XXIX


  II. 87. _Kabîr kab se bhaye vairâgî_

  Gorakhnath asks Kabîr:
  "Tell me, O Kabîr, when did your vocation begin?  Where did your
    love have its rise?"
  Kabîr answers:
  "When He whose forms are manifold had not begun His play: when
    there was no Guru, and no disciple: when the world was not
    spread out: when the Supreme One was alone--
  Then I became an ascetic; then, O Gorakh, my love was drawn to
    Brahma.
  Brahma did not hold the crown on his head; the god Vishnu was not
    anointed as king; the power of Shiva was still unborn; when I
    was instructed in Yoga.

  I became suddenly revealed in Benares, and Râmânanda illumined
    me;
  I brought with me the thirst for the Infinite, and I have come
    for the meeting with Him.
  In simplicity will I unite with the Simple One; my love will
    surge up.
  O Gorakh, march thou with His music!"



  XXX


  II. 95. _yâ tarvar men ek pakherû_

  On this tree is a bird: it dances in the joy of life.
    None knows where it is: and who knows what the burden of its
    music may be?
  Where the branches throw a deep shade, there does it have its
    nest: and it comes in the evening and flies away in the morning,
    and says not a word of that which it means.
  None tell me of this bird that sings within me.
  It is neither coloured nor colourless: it has neither form nor
    outline:
  It sits in the shadow of love.
  It dwells within the Unattainable, the Infinite, and the Eternal;
    and no one marks when it comes and goes.
  Kabîr says: "O brother Sadhu! deep is the mystery.  Let wise men
    seek to know where rests that bird."



  XXXI


  II. 100. _nis` din sâlai ghâw_

  A sore pain troubles me day and night, and I cannot sleep;
  I long for the meeting with my Beloved, and my father's house
    gives me pleasure no more.
  The gates of the sky are opened, the temple is revealed:
  I meet my husband, and leave at His feet the offering of my body
    and my mind.



  XXXII


  II. 103. _nâco re mero man, matta hoy_

  Dance, my heart!  dance to-day with joy.
  The strains of love fill the days and the nights with music, and
    the world is listening to its melodies:
  Mad with joy, life and death dance to the rhythm of this music.
    The hills and the sea and the earth dance.  The world of man
    dances in laughter and tears.
  Why put on the robe of the monk, and live aloof from the world in
    lonely pride?
  Behold!  my heart dances in the delight of a hundred arts; and
    the Creator is well pleased.



  XXXIII


  II. 105. _man mast huâ tab kyon bole_

  Where is the need of words, when love has made drunken the heart?
  I have wrapped the diamond in my cloak; why open it again and
    again?
  When its load was light, the pan of the balance went up: now it
    is full, where is the need for weighing?
  The swan has taken its flight to the lake beyond the mountains;
  why should it search for the pools and ditches any more?
  Your Lord dwells within you: why need your outward eyes be
    opened?
  Kabîr says: "Listen, my brother!  my Lord, who ravishes my eyes,
    has united Himself with me."



  XXXIV


  II. 110. _mohi tohi lâgî kaise chute_

  How could the love between Thee and me sever?
  As the leaf of the lotus abides on the water: so thou art my
    Lord, and I am Thy servant.
  As the night-bird Chakor gazes all night at the moon: so Thou art
    my Lord and I am Thy servant.
  From the beginning until the ending of time, there is love
    between Thee and me; and how shall such love be extinguished?
  Kabîr says: "As the river enters into the ocean, so my heart
    touches Thee."



  XXXV


  II. 113. _vâlam, âwo hamâre geh re_

  My body and my mind are grieved for the want of Thee;
  O my Beloved!  come to my house.
  When people say I am Thy bride, I am ashamed; for I have not
    touched Thy heart with my heart.
  Then what is this love of mine?  I have no taste for food, I have
    no sleep; my heart is ever restless within doors and without.
  As water is to the thirsty, so is the lover to the bride.  Who is
    there that will carry my news to my Beloved?
  Kabîr is restless: he is dying for sight of Him.



  XXXVI


  II. 126. _jâg piyârî, ab kân sowai_

  O friend, awake, and sleep no more!
  The night is over and gone, would you lose your day also?
  Others, who have wakened, have received jewels;
  O foolish woman!  you have lost all whilst you slept.
  Your lover is wise, and you are foolish, O woman!
  You never prepared the bed of your husband:
  O mad one! you passed your time in silly play.
  Your youth was passed in vain, for you did not know your Lord;
  Wake, wake!  See!  your bed is empty: He left you in the night.
  Kabîr says: "Only she wakes, whose heart is pierced with the
    arrow of His music."



  XXXVII


  I. 36. _sûr parkâs', tanh rain kahân pâïye_

  Where is the night, when the sun is shining?  If it is night,
    then the sun withdraws its light.  Where knowledge is, can
    ignorance endure?
  If there be ignorance, then knowledge must die.
  If there be lust, how can love be there?  Where there is love,
    there is no lust.

  Lay hold on your sword, and join in the fight.  Fight, O my
    brother, as long as life lasts.
  Strike off your enemy's head, and there make an end of him
    quickly: then come, and bow your head at your King's Durbar.
  He who is brave, never forsakes the battle: he who flies from it
    is no true fighter.
  In the field of this body a great war goes forward, against
    passion, anger, pride, and greed:
  It is in the kingdom of truth, contentment and purity, that this
    battle is raging; and the sword that rings forth most loudly is
    the sword of His Name.
  Kabîr says: "When a brave knight takes the field, a host of
    cowards is put to flight.
  It is a hard fight and a weary one, this fight of the
    truth-seeker: for the vow of the truth-seeker is more hard than
    that of the warrior, or of the widowed wife who would follow her
    husband.
  For the warrior fights for a few hours, and the widow's struggle
    with death is soon ended:
  But the truth-seeker's battle goes on day and night, as long as
    life lasts it never ceases."



  XXXVIII


  I. 50. _bhram kâ tâlâ lagâ mahal re_

  The lock of error shuts the gate, open it with the key of love:
    Thus, by opening the door, thou shalt wake the Beloved.
  Kabîr says: "O brother!  do not pass by such good fortune as
    this."



  XXXIX


  I. 59. _sâdho, yah tan thâth tanvure ka_

  O friend! this body is His lyre; He tightens its strings, and
    draws from it the melody of Brahma.
  If the strings snap and the keys slacken, then to dust must this
    instrument of dust return:
  Kabîr says: "None but Brahma can evoke its melodies."



  XL


  I. 65. _avadhû bhûle ko ghar lâwe_

  He is dear to me indeed who can call back the wanderer to his
    home.  In the home is the true union, in the home is enjoyment
    of life: why should I forsake my home and wander in the forest?
  If Brahma helps me to realize truth, verily I will find both
    bondage and deliverance in home.
  He is dear to me indeed who has power to dive deep into Brahma;
    whose mind loses itself with ease in His contemplation.
  He is dear to me who knows Brahma, and can dwell on His supreme
    truth in meditation; and who can play the melody of the
    Infinite by uniting love and renunciation in life.
  Kabîr says: "The home is the abiding place; in the home is
    reality; the home helps to attain Him Who is real.  So stay
    where you are, and all things shall come to you in time."



  XLI


  I. 76. _santo, sahaj samâdh bhalî_

  O sadhu!  the simple union is the best.  Since the day when I met
    with my Lord, there has been no end to the sport of our love.
  I shut not my eyes, I close not my ears, I do not mortify my
    body;
  I see with eyes open and smile, and behold His beauty everywhere:
  I utter His Name, and whatever I see, it reminds me of Him;
    whatever I do., it becomes His worship.
  The rising and the setting are one to me; all contradictions are
    solved.
  Wherever I go, I move round Him,
  All I achieve is His service:
  When I lie down, I lie prostrate at His feet.

  He is the only adorable one to me: I have none other.
  My tongue has left off impure words, it sings His glory day and
    night:
  Whether I rise or sit down, I can never forget Him; for the
    rhythm of His music beats in my ears.
  Kabîr says: "My heart is frenzied, and I disclose in my soul what
    is hidden.  I am immersed in that one great bliss which
    transcends all pleasure and pain."



  XLII


  I. 79. _tîrath men to sab pânî hai_

  There is nothing but water at the holy bathing places; and I know
    that they are useless, for I have bathed in them.
  The images are all lifeless, they cannot speak; I know, for I
    have cried aloud to them.
  The Purana and the Koran are mere words; lifting up the curtain,
    I have seen.
  Kabîr gives utterance to the words of experience; and he knows
    very well that all other things are untrue.



  XLIII


  I. 82. _pânî vic mîn piyâsî_

  I laugh when I hear that the fish in the water is thirsty:
  You do not see that the Real is in your home, and you wander from
    forest to forest listlessly!
  Here is the truth!  Go where you will, to Benares or to Mathura;
    if you do not find your soul, the world is unreal to you.



  XLIV


  I. 93. _gagan math gaib nisân gade_

  The Hidden Banner is planted in the temple of the sky; there the
    blue canopy decked with the moon and set with bright jewels is
    spread.
  There the light of the sun and the moon is shining: still your
    mind to silence before that splendour.
  Kabîr says: "He who has drunk of this nectar, wanders like one
    who is mad."



  XLV


  I. 97. _sâdho, ko hai kânh se âyo_

  Who are you, and whence do you come?
  Where dwells that Supreme Spirit, and how does He have His sport
    with all created things?
  The fire is in the wood; but who awakens it suddenly?  Then it
    turns to ashes, and where goes the force of the fire?
  The true guru teaches that He has neither limit nor infinitude.
  Kabîr says: "Brahma suits His language to the understanding of
    His hearer."



  XLVI

  I. 98. _sâdho, sahajai kâyâ s'odho_

  O sadhu!  purify your body in the simple way.
  As the seed is within the banyan tree, and within the seed are
    the flowers, the fruits, and the shade:
  So the germ is within the body, and within that germ is the body
    again.
  The fire, the air, the water, the earth, and the aether; you
    cannot have these outside of Him.
  O, Kazi, O Pundit, consider it well: what is there that is not in
    the soul?
  The water-filled pitcher is placed upon water, it has water
    within and without.
  It should not be given a name, lest it call forth the error of
    dualism.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to the Word, the Truth, which is your
    essence.  He speaks the Word to Himself; and He Himself is the
    Creator."



  XLVII


  I. 102. _tarvar ek mûl vin thâdâ_

  There is a strange tree, which stands without roots and bears
    fruits without blossoming;
  It has no branches and no leaves, it is lotus all over.
  Two birds sing there; one is the Guru, and the other the
    disciple:
  The disciple chooses the manifold fruits of life and tastes them,
    and the Guru beholds him in joy.
  What Kabîr says is hard to understand: "The bird is beyond
    seeking, yet it is most clearly visible.  The Formless is in
    the midst of all forms.  I sing the glory of forms."



  XLVIII


  I. 107. _calat mansâ acal kînhî_

  I have stilled my restless mind, and my heart is radiant: for in
    Thatness I have seen beyond That-ness.  In company I have seen
    the Comrade Himself.
  Living in bondage, I have set myself free: I have broken away
    from the clutch of all narrowness.
  Kabîr says: "I have attained the unattainable, and my heart is
    coloured with the colour of love."



  XLIX


  I. 105. _jo dîsai, so to hai nâhîn_

  That which you see is not: and for that which is, you have no
    words.
  Unless you see, you believe not: what is told you you cannot
    accept.
  He who is discerning knows by the word; and the ignorant stands
    gaping.
  Some contemplate the Formless, and others meditate on form: but
    the wise man knows that Brahma is beyond both.
  That beauty of His is not seen of the eye: that metre of His is
    not heard of the ear.
  Kabîr says: "He who has found both love and renunciation never
    descends to death."



  L


  I. 126. _muralî bajat akhand sadâye_

  The flute of the Infinite is played without ceasing, and its
    sound is love:
  When love renounces all limits, it reaches truth.
  How widely the fragrance spreads!  It has no end, nothing stands
    in its way.
  The form of this melody is bright like a million suns:
    incomparably sounds the vina, the vina of the notes of truth.



  LI


  I. 129. _sakhiyo, ham hûn bhâî vâlamâs'î_

  Dear friend, I am eager to meet my Beloved!  My youth has
    flowered, and the pain of separation from Him troubles my
    breast.
  I am wandering yet in the alleys of knowledge without purpose,
    but I have received His news in these alleys of knowledge.
  I have a letter from my Beloved: in this letter is an unutterable
    message, and now my fear of death is done away.
  Kabîr says: "O my loving friend!  I have got for my gift the
    Deathless One."



  LII


  I. 130. _sâîn vin dard kareje hoy_

  When I am parted from my Beloved, my heart is full of misery: I
    have no comfort in the day, I have no sleep in the night.  To
    whom shall I tell my sorrow?
  The night is dark; the hours slip by.  Because my Lord is absent,
    I start up and tremble with fear.
  Kabîr says: "Listen, my friend!  there is no other satisfaction,
    save in the encounter with the Beloved."



  LIII


  I. 122. _kaum muralî s'abd s'un ânand bhayo_

  What is that flute whose music thrills me with joy?
  The flame burns without a lamp;
  The lotus blossoms without a root;
  Flowers bloom in clusters;
  The moon-bird is devoted to the moon;
  With all its heart the rain-bird longs for the shower of rain;
  But upon whose love does the Lover concentrate His entire life?



  LIV


  I. 112. _s'untâ nahî dhun kî khabar_

  Have you not heard the tune which the Unstruck Music is playing?
    In the midst of the chamber the harp of joy is gently and
    sweetly played; and where is the need of going without to hear
    it?
  If you have not drunk of the nectar of that One Love, what boots
    it though you should purge yourself of all stains?
  The Kazi is searching the words of the Koran, and instructing
    others: but if his heart be not steeped in that love, what does
    it avail, though he be a teacher of men?
  The Yogi dyes his garments with red: but if he knows naught of
    that colour of love, what does it avail though his garments be
    tinted?
  Kabîr says: "Whether I be in the temple or the balcony, in the
    camp or in the flower garden, I tell you truly that every
    moment my Lord is taking His delight in me."



  LV


  I. 73. _bhakti kâ mârag jhînâ re_

  Subtle is the path of love!
  Therein there is no asking and no not-asking,
  There one loses one's self at His feet,
  There one is immersed in the joy of the seeking: plunged in the
    deeps of love as the fish in the water.
  The lover is never slow in offering his head for his Lord's
    service.
  Kabîr declares the secret of this love.



  LVI


  I. 68. _bhâi kôî satguru sant kahâwaî_

  He is the real Sadhu, who can reveal the form of the Formless to
    the vision of these eyes:
  Who teaches the simple way of attaining Him, that is other than
    rites or ceremonies:
  Who does not make you close the doors, and hold the breath, and
    renounce the world:
  Who makes you perceive the Supreme Spirit wherever the mind
    attaches itself:
  Who teaches you to be still in the midst of all your activities.
  Ever immersed in bliss, having no fear in his mind, he keeps the
    spirit of union in the midst of all enjoyments.
  The infinite dwelling of the Infinite Being is everywhere: in
    earth, water, sky, and air:
  Firm as the thunderbolt, the seat of the seeker is established
    above the void.
  He who is within is without: I see Him and none else.



  LVII


  I. 66. _sâdho, s'abd sâdhnâ kîjai_

  Receive that Word from which the Universe springeth!
  That word is the Guru; I have heard it, and become the disciple.
  How many are there who know the meaning of that word?

  O Sadhu!  practise that Word!
  The Vedas and the Puranas proclaim it,
  The world is established in it,
  The Rishis and devotees speak of it:
  But none knows the mystery of the Word.
  The householder leaves his house when he hears it,
  The ascetic comes back to love when he hears it,
  The Six Philosophies expound it,
  The Spirit of Renunciation points to that Word,
  From that Word the world-form has sprung,
  That Word reveals all.
  Kabîr says: "But who knows whence the Word cometh?



  LVIII


  I. 63. _pîle pyâlâ, ho matwâlâ_

  Empty the Cup!  O be drunken!
  Drink the divine nectar of His Name!
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, dear Sadhu!
  From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head this mind is
    filled with poison."



  LIX


  I. 52. _khasm na cînhai bâwari_

  O man, if thou dost not know thine own Lord, whereof art thou so
    proud?
  Put thy cleverness away: mere words shall never unite thee to
    Him.
  Do not deceive thyself with the witness of the Scriptures:
  Love is something other than this, and he who has sought it truly
    has found it.



  LX


  I. 56. _sukh sindh kî sair kâ_

  The savour of wandering in the ocean of deathless life has rid me
    of all my asking:
  As the tree is in the seed, so all diseases are in this asking.



  LXI


  I. 48. _sukh sâgar men âîke_

  When at last you are come to the ocean of happiness, do not go
    back thirsty.
  Wake, foolish man!  for Death stalks you.  Here is pure water
    before you; drink it at every breath.
  Do not follow the mirage on foot, but thirst for the nectar;
  Dhruva, Prahlad, and Shukadeva have drunk of it, and also Raidas
    has tasted it:
  The saints are drunk with love, their thirst is for love.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, brother!  The nest of fear is broken.
  Not for a moment have you come face to face with the world:
  You are weaving your bondage of falsehood, your words are full of
    deception:
  With the load of desires which you.  hold on your head, how can
    you be light?"
  Kabîr says: "Keep within you truth, detachment, and love."



  LXII


  I. 35. _satî ko kaun s'ikhâwtâ hai_

  Who has ever taught the widowed wife to burn herself on the pyre
    of her dead husband?
  And who has ever taught love to find bliss in renunciation?



  LXIII


  I. 39. _are man, dhîraj kâhe na dharai_

  Why so impatient, my heart?
  He who watches over birds, beasts, and insects,
  He who cared for you whilst you were yet in your mother's womb,
  Shall He not care for you now that you are come forth?
  Oh my heart, how could you turn from the smile of your Lord and
    wander so far from Him?
  You have left Your Beloved and are thinking of others: and this
    is why all your work is in vain.



  LXIV


  I. 117. _sâîn se lagan kathin hai, bhâî_

  Now hard it is to meet my Lord!
  The rain-bird wails in thirst for the rain: almost she dies of
    her longing, yet she would have none other water than the
    rain.
  Drawn by the love of music, the deer moves forward: she dies as
    she listens to the music, yet she shrinks not in fear.
  The widowed wife sits by the body of her dead husband: she is not
    afraid of the fire.
  Put away all fear for this poor body.



  LXV


  I. 22. _jab main bhûlâ, re bhâî_

  O brother! when I was forgetful, my true Guru showed me the Way.
  Then I left off all rites and ceremonies, I bathed no more in the
    holy water:
  Then I learned that it was I alone who was mad, and the whole
    world beside me was sane; and I had disturbed these wise people.
  From that time forth I knew no more how to roll in the dust in
    obeisance:
  I do not ring the temple bell:
  I do not set the idol on its throne:
  I do not worship the image with flowers.
  It is not the austerities that mortify the flesh which are
    pleasing to the Lord,
  When you leave off your clothes and kill your senses, you do not
    please the Lord:
  The man who is kind and who practises righteousness, who remains
    passive amidst the affairs of the world, who considers all
    creatures on earth as his own self,
  He attains the Immortal Being, the true God is ever with him.
  Kabîr says: "He attains the true Name whose words are pure, and
    who is free from pride and conceit."



  LXVI


  I. 20. _man na rangâye_

  The Yogi dyes his garments, instead of dyeing his mind in the
    colours of love:
  He sits within the temple of the Lord, leaving Brahma to worship
    a stone.
  He pierces holes in his ears, he has a great beard and matted
    locks, he looks like a goat:
  He goes forth into the wilderness, killing all his desires, and
    turns himself into an eunuch:
  He shaves his head and dyes his garments; he reads the Gîtâ and
    becomes a mighty talker.
  Kabîr says: "You are going to the doors of death, bound hand and
    foot!"



  LXVII


  I. 9. _nâ jâne sâhab kaisâ hai_

  I do not know what manner of God is mine.
  The Mullah cries aloud to Him: and why?  Is your Lord deaf?  The
    subtle anklets that ring on the feet of an insect when it moves
    are heard of Him.
  Tell your beads, paint your forehead with the mark of your God,
    and wear matted locks long and showy: but a deadly weapon is in
    your heart, and how shall you have God?



  LXVIII


  III. 102. _ham se rahâ na jây_

  I hear the melody of His flute, and I cannot contain myself:
  The flower blooms, though it is not spring; and already the bee
    has received its invitation.
  The sky roars and the lightning flashes, the waves arise in my
    heart,
  The rain falls; and my heart longs for my Lord.
  Where the rhythm of the world rises and falls, thither my heart
    has reached:
  There the hidden banners are fluttering in the air.
  Kabîr says: "My heart is dying, though it lives."



  LXIX


  III. 2. _jo khodâ masjid vasat hai_

  If God be within the mosque, then to whom does this world belong?
  If Ram be within the image which you find upon your pilgrimage,
    then who is there to know what happens without?
  Hari is in the East: Allah is in the West.  Look within your
    heart, for there you will find both Karim and Ram;
  All the men and women of the world are His living forms.
  Kabîr is the child of Allah and of Ram: He is my Guru, He is my
    Pir.



  LXX


  III. 9. _s'îl santosh sadâ samadrishti_

  He who is meek and contented., he who has an equal vision, whose
    mind is filled with the fullness of acceptance and of rest;
  He who has seen Him and touched Him, he is freed from all fear
    and trouble.
  To him the perpetual thought of God is like sandal paste smeared
    on the body, to him nothing else is delight:
  His work and his rest are filled with music: he sheds abroad the
    radiance of love.
  Kabîr says: "Touch His feet, who is one and indivisible,
    immutable and peaceful; who fills all vessels to the brim with
    joy, and whose form is love."



  LXXI


  III. 13. _sâdh sangat pîtam_

  Go thou to the company of the good, where the Beloved One has His
    dwelling place:
  Take all thy thoughts and love and instruction from thence.
  Let that assembly be burnt to ashes where His Name is not spoken!
  Tell me, how couldst thou hold a wedding-feast, if the bridegroom
    himself were not there?
  Waver no more, think only of the Beloved;
  Set not thy heart on the worship of other gods, there is no worth
    in the worship of other masters.
  Kabîr deliberates and says: "Thus thou shalt never find the
    Beloved!"



  LXXII


  III. 26. _tor hîrâ hirâilwâ kîcad men_

  The jewel is lost in the mud, and all are seeking for it;
  Some look for it in the east, and some in the west; some in the
    water and some amongst stones.
  But the servant Kabîr has appraised it at its true value, and has
    wrapped it with care in the end of the mantle of his heart.



  LXXIII


  III. 26. _âyau din gaune kâ ho_

  The palanquin came to take me away to my husband's home, and it
    sent through my heart a thrill of joy;
  But the bearers have brought me into the lonely forest, where I
    have no one of my own.
  O bearers, I entreat you by your feet, wait but a moment longer:
    let me go back to my kinsmen and friends, and take my leave of
    them.
  The servant Kabîr sings: "O Sadhu!  finish your buying and
    selling, have done with your good and your bad: for there are
    no markets and no shops in the land to which you go."



  LXXIV


  III. 30. _are dil, prem nagar kä ant na pâyâ_

  O my heart! you have not known all the secrets of this city of
    love: in ignorance you came, and in ignorance you return.
  O my friend, what have you done with this life?  You have taken
    on your head the burden heavy with stones, and who is to
    lighten it for you?
  Your Friend stands on the other shore, but you never think in
    your mind how you may meet with Him:
  The boat is broken, and yet you sit ever upon the bank; and thus
    you are beaten to no purpose by the waves.
  The servant Kabîr asks you to consider; who is there that shall
    befriend you at the last?
  You are alone, you have no companion: you will suffer the
    consequences of your own deeds.



  LXXV


  III. 55. _ved kahe sargun ke âge_

  The Vedas say that the Unconditioned stands beyond the world of
    Conditions.
  O woman, what does it avail thee to dispute whether He is beyond
    all or in all?
  See thou everything as thine own dwelling place: the mist of
    pleasure and pain can never spread there.
  There Brahma is revealed day and night: there light is His
    garment, light is His seat, light rests on thy head.
  Kabîr says: "The Master, who is true, He is all light."



  LXXVI


  III. 48. _tû surat nain nihâr_

  Open your eyes of love, and see Him who pervades this world I
    consider it well, and know that this is your own country.
  When you meet the true Guru, He will awaken your heart;
  He will tell you the secret of love and detachment, and then you
    will know indeed that He transcends this universe.
  This world is the City of Truth, its maze of paths enchants the
    heart:
  We can reach the goal without crossing the road, such is the
    sport unending.
  Where the ring of manifold joys ever dances about Him, there is
    the sport of Eternal Bliss.
  When we know this, then all our receiving and renouncing is
    over;
  Thenceforth the heat of having shall never scorch us more.

  He is the Ultimate Rest unbounded:
  He has spread His form of love throughout all the world.
  From that Ray which is Truth, streams of new forms are
    perpetually springing: and He pervades those forms.
  All the gardens and groves and bowers are abounding with blossom;
    and the air breaks forth into ripples of joy.
  There the swan plays a wonderful game,
  There the Unstruck Music eddies around the Infinite One;
  There in the midst the Throne of the Unheld is shining, whereon
    the great Being sits--
  Millions of suns are shamed by the radiance of a single hair of
    His body.
  On the harp of the road what true melodies are being sounded!
    and its notes pierce the heart:
  There the Eternal Fountain is playing its endless life-streams of
    birth and death.
  They call Him Emptiness who is the Truth of truths, in Whom all
    truths are stored!

  There within Him creation goes forward, which is beyond all
    philosophy; for philosophy cannot attain to Him:
  There is an endless world, O my Brother! and there is the
    Nameless Being, of whom naught can be said.
  Only he knows it who has reached that region: it is other than
    all that is heard and said.
  No form, no body, no length, no breadth is seen there: how can I
    tell you that which it is?
  He comes to the Path of the Infinite on whom the grace of the
    Lord descends: he is freed from births and deaths who attains
    to Him.
  Kabîr says: "It cannot be told by the words of the mouth, it
    cannot be written on paper:
  It is like a dumb person who tastes a sweet thing--how shall it
    be explained?"



  LXXVII


  III. 60. _cal hamsâ wâ des' jahân_

  O my heart!  let us go to that country where dwells the Beloved,
    the ravisher of my heart!
  There Love is filling her pitcher from the well, yet she has no
    rope wherewith to draw water;
  There the clouds do not cover the sky, yet the rain falls down in
    gentle showers:
  O bodiless one!  do not sit on your doorstep; go forth and bathe
    yourself in that rain!
  There it is ever moonlight and never dark; and who speaks of one
    sun only?  that land is illuminate with the rays of a million
    suns.



  LXXVIII


  III. 63. _kahain Kabîr, s'uno ho sâdho_

  Kabîr says: "O Sadhu! hear my deathless words.  If you want your
    own good, examine and consider them well.
  You have estranged yourself from the Creator, of whom you have
    sprung: you have lost your reason, you have bought death.
  All doctrines and all teachings are sprung from Him, from Him
    they grow: know this for certain, and have no fear.
  Hear from me the tidings of this great truth!
  Whose name do you sing, and on whom do you meditate?  O, come
    forth from this entanglement!
  He dwells at the heart of all things, so why take refuge in empty
    desolation?
  If you place the Guru at a distance from you, then it is but the
    distance that you honour:
  If indeed the Master be far away, then who is it else that is
    creating this world?
  When you think that He is not here, then you wander further and
    further away, and seek Him in vain with tears.
  Where He is far off, there He is unattainable: where He is near,
    He is very bliss.
  Kabîr says: "Lest His servant should suffer pain He pervades him
    through and through."
  Know yourself then, O Kabîr; for He is in you from head to foot.
  Sing with gladness, and keep your seat unmoved within your heart.



  LXXIX


  III. 66. _nâ main dharmî nahîn adharmî_

  I am neither pious nor ungodly, I live neither by law nor by
    sense,
  I am neither a speaker nor hearer, I am neither a servant nor
    master, I am neither bond nor free,
  I am neither detached nor attached.
  I am far from none: I am near to none.
  I shall go neither to hell nor to heaven.
  I do all works; yet I am apart from all works.
  Few comprehend my meaning: he who can comprehend it, he sits
    unmoved.
  Kabîr seeks neither to establish nor to destroy.



  LXXX


  III. 69. _satta nâm hai sab ten nyârâ_

  The true Name is like none other name!
  The distinction of the Conditioned from the Unconditioned is but
    a word:
  The Unconditioned is the seed, the Conditioned is the flower and
    the fruit.
  Knowledge is the branch, and the Name is the root.
  Look, and see where the root is: happiness shall be yours when
    you come to the root.
  The root will lead you to the branch, the leaf, the flower, and
    the fruit:
  It is the encounter with the Lord, it is the attainment of bliss,
    it is the reconciliation of the Conditioned and the
    Unconditioned.



  LXXXI


  III. 74. _pratham ek jo âpai âp_

  In the beginning was He alone, sufficient unto Himself: the
    formless, colourless, and unconditioned Being.
  Then was there neither beginning, middle, nor end;
  Then were no eyes, no darkness, no light;
  Then were no ground, air, nor sky; no fire, water, nor earth; no
    rivers like the Ganges and the Jumna, no seas, oceans, and waves.
  Then was neither vice nor virtue; scriptures there were not, as
    the Vedas and Puranas, nor as the Koran.
  Kabîr ponders in his mind and says, "Then was there no activity:
    the Supreme Being remained merged in the unknown depths of His
    own self."
  The Guru neither eats nor drinks, neither lives nor dies:
  Neither has He form, line, colour, nor vesture.
  He who has neither caste nor clan nor anything else--how may I
    describe His glory?
  He has neither form nor formlessness,
  He has no name,
  He has neither colour nor colourlessness,
  He has no dwelling-place.



  LXXXII


  III. 76. _kahain Kabîr vicâr ke_

  Kabîr ponders and says: "He who has neither caste nor country,
    who is formless and without quality, fills all space."
  The Creator brought into being the Game of Joy: and from the word
    Om the Creation sprang.
  The earth is His joy; His joy is the sky;
  His joy is the flashing of the sun and the moon;
  His joy is the beginning, the middle, and the end;
  His joy is eyes, darkness, and light.
  Oceans and waves are His joy: His joy the Sarasvati, the Jumna,
    and the Ganges.
  The Guru is One: and life and death., union and separation, are
    all His plays of joy!
  His play the land and water, the whole universe!
  His play the earth and the sky!
  In play is the Creation spread out, in play it is established.
    The whole world, says Kabîr, rests in His play, yet still the
    Player remains unknown.



  LXXXIII


  III. 84. _jhî jhî jantar bâjai_

  The harp gives forth murmurous music; and the dance goes on
    without hands and feet.
  It is played without fingers, it is heard without ears: for He is
    the ear, and He is the listener.
  The gate is locked, but within there is fragrance: and there the
    meeting is seen of none.
  The wise shall understand it.



  LXXXIV


  III. 89. _mor phakîrwâ mângi jây_

  The Beggar goes a-begging, but
  I could not even catch sight of Him:
  And what shall I beg of the Beggar He gives without my asking.
  Kabîr says: "I am His own: now let that befall which may befall!"



  LXXXV


  III. 90. _naihar se jiyarâ phât re_

  My heart cries aloud for the house of my lover; the open road and
    the shelter of a roof are all one to her who has lost the city
    of her husband.
  My heart finds no joy in anything: my mind and my body are
    distraught.
  His palace has a million gates, but there is a vast ocean between
    it and me:
  How shall I cross it, O friend?  for endless is the outstretching
    of the path.
  How wondrously this lyre is wrought!  When its strings are
    rightly strung, it maddens the heart: but when the keys are
    broken and the strings are loosened, none regard it more.
  I tell my parents with laughter that I must go to my Lord in the
    morning;

  They are angry, for they do not want me to go, and they say: "She
    thinks she has gained such dominion over her husband that she
    can have whatsoever she wishes; and therefore she is impatient
    to go to him."
  Dear friend, lift my veil lightly now; for this is the night of
    love.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me!  My heart is eager to meet my lover: I
    lie sleepless upon my bed.  Remember me early in the morning!"



  LXXXVI


  III. 96. _jîv mahal men S'iv pahunwâ_

  Serve your God, who has come into this temple of life!
  Do not act the part of a madman, for the night is thickening
    fast.
  He has awaited me for countless ages, for love of me He has
    lost His heart:
  Yet I did not know the bliss that was so near to me, for my love
    was not yet awake.
  But now, my Lover has made known to me the meaning of the note
    that struck my ear:
  Now, my good fortune is come.
  Kabîr says: "Behold!  how great is my good fortune!  I have
    received the unending caress of my Beloved!"



  LXXXVII


  I. 71. _gagan ghatâ ghaharânî, sâdho_

  Clouds thicken in the sky!  O, listen to the deep voice of their
    roaring;
  The rain comes from the east with its monotonous murmur.
  Take care of the fences and boundaries of your fields, lest the
    rains overflow them;
  Prepare the soil of deliverance, and let the creepers of love and
    renunciation be soaked in this shower.
  It is the prudent farmer who will bring his harvest home; he
    shall fill both his vessels, and feed both the wise men and the
    saints.



  LXXXVIII


  III. 118. _âj din ke main jaun balihârî_

  This day is dear to me above all other days, for to-day the
    Beloved Lord is a guest in my house;
  My chamber and my courtyard are beautiful with His presence.
  My longings sing His Name, and they are become lost in His great
    beauty:
  I wash His feet, and I look upon His Face; and I lay before Him
    as an offering my body, my mind, and all that I have.
  What a day of gladness is that day in which my Beloved, who is my
    treasure, comes to my house!
  All evils fly from my heart when I see my Lord.
  "My love has touched Him; my heart is longing for the Name which
    is Truth."
  Thus sings Kabîr, the servant of all servants.



  LXXXIX


  I. 100. _kôi s'untâ hai jñânî râg gagan men_

  Is there any wise man who will listen to that solemn music which
    arises in the sky?
  For He, the Source of all music, makes all vessels full fraught,
    and rests in fullness Himself.
  He who is in the body is ever athirst, for he pursues that which
    is in part:
  But ever there wells forth deeper and deeper the sound "He is
    this--this is He"; fusing love and renunciation into one.
  Kabîr says: "O brother!  that is the Primal Word."



  XC


  I. 108. _main kâ se bûjhaun_

  To whom shall I go to learn about my Beloved?
  Kabîr says: "As you never may find the forest if you ignore the
    tree, so He may never be found in abstractions."



  XCI


  III. 12. _samskirit bhâshâ padhi lînhâ_

  I have learned the Sanskrit language, so let all men call me
    wise:
  But where is the use of this, when I am floating adrift, and
    parched with thirst, and burning with the heat of desire?
  To no purpose do you bear on your head this load of pride and
    vanity.
  Kabîr says: "Lay it down in the dust, and go forth to meet the
    Beloved.  Address Him as your Lord."



  XCII


  III. 110. _carkhâ calai surat virahin kâ_

  The woman who is parted from her lover spins at the spinning
    wheel.
  The city of the body arises in its beauty; and within it the
    palace of the mind has been built.
  The wheel of love revolves in the sky, and the seat is made of
    the jewels of knowledge:
  What subtle threads the woman weaves, and makes them fine with
    love and reverence!
  Kabîr says: "I am weaving the garland of day and night.  When my
    Lover comes and touches me with His feet, I shall offer Him my
    tears."



  XCIII


  III. 111. _kotîn bhânu candra târâgan_

  Beneath the great umbrella of my King millions of suns and moons
    and stars are shining!
  He is the Mind within my mind: He is the Eye within mine eye.
  Ah, could my mind and eyes be one!  Could my love but reach to my
    Lover!  Could but the fiery heat of my heart be cooled!
  Kabîr says: "When you unite love with the Lover, then you have
    love's perfection."



  XCIV


  I. 92. _avadhû begam des' hamârâ_

  O sadhu! my land is a sorrowless land.
  I cry aloud to all, to the king and the beggar, the emperor and
    the fakir--
  Whosoever seeks for shelter in the Highest, let all come and
    settle in my land!
  Let the weary come and lay his burdens here!

  So live here, my brother, that you may cross with ease to that
    other shore.
  It is a land without earth or sky, without moon or stars;
  For only the radiance of Truth shines in my Lord's Durbar.
  Kabîr says: "O beloved brother!  naught is essential save Truth."



  XCV


  I. 109. _sâîn ke sangat sâsur âî_

  Came with my Lord to my Lord's home: but I lived not with Him and
    I tasted Him not, and my youth passed away like a dream.
  On my wedding night my women-friends sang in chorus, and I was
    anointed with the unguents of pleasure and pain:
  But when the ceremony was over, I left my Lord and came away, and
    my kinsman tried to console me upon the road.
  Kabîr says, "I shall go to my Lord's house with my love at my
    side; then shall I sound the trumpet of triumph!"



  XCVI


  I. 75. _samajh dekh man mît piyarwâ_

  O friend, dear heart of mine, think well!  if you love indeed,
    then why do you sleep?
  If you have found Him, then give yourself utterly, and take Him
    to you.
  Why do you loose Him again and again?
  If the deep sleep of rest has come to your eyes, why waste your
    time making the bed and arranging the pillows?
  Kabîr says: "I tell you the ways of love!  Even though the head
    itself must be given, why should you weep over it?"



  XCVII


  II. 90. _sâhab ham men, sâhab tum men_

  The Lord is in me, the Lord is in you, as life is in every seed.
    O servant!  put false pride away, and seek for Him within you.
  A million suns are ablaze with light,
  The sea of blue spreads in the sky,
  The fever of life is stilled, and all stains are washed away;
    when I sit in the midst of that world.
  Hark to the unstruck bells and drums!  Take your delight in love!
  Rains pour down without water, and the rivers are streams of
    light.
  One Love it is that pervades the whole world, few there are who
    know it fully:
  They are blind who hope to see it by the light of reason, that
    reason which is the cause of separation--
  The House of Reason is very far away!
  How blessed is Kabîr, that amidst this great joy he sings within
    his own vessel.
  It is the music of the meeting of soul with soul;
  It is the music of the forgetting of sorrows;
  It is the music that transcends all coming in and all going
    forth.



  XCVIII


  II. 98. _ritu phâgun niyarânî_

  The month of March draws near: ah, who will unite me to my Lover?
  How shall I find words for the beauty of my Beloved?  For He is
    merged in all beauty.
  His colour is in all the pictures of the world, and it bewitches
    the body and the mind.
  Those who know this, know what is this unutterable play of the
    Spring.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, brother' there are not many who have
    found this out."



  XCIX


  II. 111. _Nârad, pyâr so antar nâhî_

  Oh Narad!  I know that my Lover cannot be far:
  When my Lover wakes, I wake; when He sleeps, I sleep.
  He is destroyed at the root who gives pain to my Beloved.
  Where they sing His praise, there I live;
  When He moves, I walk before Him: my heart yearns for my Beloved.
  The infinite pilgrimage lies at His feet, a million devotees are
    seated there.
  Kabîr says: "The Lover Himself reveals the glory of true love."



  C


  II. 122. _kôî prem kî peng jhulâo re_

  Hang up the swing of love to-day!  Hang the body and the mind
    between the arms of the Beloved, in the ecstasy of love's joy:
  Bring the tearful streams of the rainy clouds to your eyes, and
    cover your heart with the shadow of darkness:
  Bring your face nearer to His ear, and speak of the deepest
    longings of your heart.
  Kabîr says: "Listen to me, brother!  bring the vision of the
    Beloved in your heart."














*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF KABIR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Stories from Tagore
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Stories from Tagore

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: August 24, 2010 [eBook #33525]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Asad Razzaki and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES FROM TAGORE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Asad Razzaki and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note:


  Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been retained as in
    the original.

  A few typographical errors have been corrected. A complete list
    follows the text.

  Words italicized in the original are surrounded by _underscores_.

  Words with bold emphasis in the original are surrounded by =equals
    signs=.




             STORIES FROM TAGORE


               [Illustration]

            THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

      NEW YORK A. BOSTON A. CHICAGO A. DALLAS
           ATLANTA A. SAN FRANCISCO

           MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED

          LONDON A. BOMBAY A. CALCUTTA
                 MELBOURNE

        THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.

                  TORONTO




              Stories from Tagore


                   New York
             The Macmillan Company
                     1918

             _All rights reserved_


            Copyright 1916 and 1918
            BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

  Set up and electrotyped. Published, October, 1918




PREFACE


Every experienced teacher must have noticed the difficulty of
instructing Indian children out of books that are specially intended for
use in English schools. It is not merely that the subjects are
unfamiliar, but almost every phrase has English associations that are
strange to Indian ears. The environment in which they are written is
unknown to the Indian school boy and his mind becomes overburdened with
its details which he fails to understand. He cannot give his whole
attention to the language and thus master it quickly.

The present Indian story-book avoids some at least of these impediments.
The surroundings described in it are those of the students' everyday
life; the sentiments and characters are familiar. The stories are simply
told, and the notes at the end will be sufficient to explain obscure
passages. It should be possible for the Indian student to follow the
pages of the book easily and intelligently. Those students who have read
the stories in the original will have the further advantage of knowing
beforehand the whole trend of the narrative and thus they will be able
to concentrate their thoughts on the English language itself.

It is proposed to publish together in a single volume the original
stories whose English translations are given in this Reader. Versions of
the same stories in the different Indian vernaculars have already
appeared, and others are likely to follow.

Two of the longest stories in this book--"Master Mashai" and "The Son of
Rashmani"--are reproduced in English for the first time. The rest of the
stories have been taken, with slight revision, from two English volumes
entitled "The Hungry Stones" and "Mashi." A short paragraph has been
added from the original Bengali at the end of the story called "The
Postmaster." This was unfortunately omitted in the first English
edition.

The list of words to be studied has been chosen from each story in order
to bring to notice different types of English words. The lists are in no
sense exhaustive. The end in view has been to endeavour to create an
interest in Indian words and their history, which may lead on to further
study.




CONTENTS


                                       PAGE

  THE CABULIWALLAH                       3

  THE HOME-COMING                       21

  ONCE THERE WAS A KING                 35

  THE CHILD'S RETURN                    51

  MASTER MASHAI                         69

  SUBHA                                101

  THE POSTMASTER                       115

  THE CASTAWAY                         129

  THE SON OF RASHMANI                  151

  THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE               203

  NOTES                                223




THE CABULIWALLAH




STORIES FROM TAGORE




I

THE CABULIWALLAH


My five years' old daughter Mini cannot live without chattering. I
really believe that in all her life she has not wasted a minute in
silence. Her mother is often vexed at this, and would stop her prattle,
but I would not. To see Mini quiet is unnatural, and I cannot bear it
long. And so my own talk with her is always lively.

One morning, for instance, when I was in the midst of the seventeenth
chapter of my new novel, my little Mini stole into the room, and putting
her hand into mine, said: "Father! Ramdayal the door-keeper calls a crow
a krow! He doesn't know anything, does he?"

Before I could explain to her the differences of language in this world,
she was embarked on the full tide of another subject. "What do you
think, Father? Bhola says there is an elephant in the clouds, blowing
water out of his trunk, and that is why it rains!"

And then, darting off anew, while I sat still making ready some reply to
this last saying: "Father! what relation is Mother to you?"

With a grave face I contrived to say: "Go and play with Bhola, Mini! I
am busy!"

The window of my room overlooks the road. The child had seated herself
at my feet near my table, and was playing softly, drumming on her knees.
I was hard at work on my seventeenth chapter, where Pratap Singh, the
hero, had just caught Kanchanlata, the heroine, in his arms, and was
about to escape with her by the third-story window of the castle, when
all of a sudden Mini left her play, and ran to the window, crying: "A
Cabuliwallah! a Cabuliwallah!" Sure enough in the street below was a
Cabuliwallah, passing slowly along. He wore the loose, soiled clothing
of his people, with a tall turban; there was a bag on his back, and he
carried boxes of grapes in his hand.

I cannot tell what were my daughter's feelings at the sight of this man,
but she began to call him loudly. "Ah!" I thought, "he will come in, and
my seventeenth chapter will never be finished!" At which exact moment
the Cabuliwallah turned, and looked up at the child. When she saw this,
overcome by terror, she fled to her mother's protection and
disappeared. She had a blind belief that inside the bag, which the big
man carried, there were perhaps two or three other children like
herself. The pedlar meanwhile entered my doorway and greeted me with a
smiling face.

So precarious was the position of my hero and my heroine, that my first
impulse was to stop and buy something, since the man had been called. I
made some small purchases, and a conversation began about Abdurrahman,
the Russians, the English, and the Frontier Policy.

As he was about to leave, he asked: "And where is the little girl, sir?"

And I, thinking that Mini must get rid of her false fear, had her
brought out.

She stood by my chair, and looked at the Cabuliwallah and his bag. He
offered her nuts and raisins, but she would not be tempted, and only
clung the closer to me, with all her doubts increased.

This was their first meeting.

One morning, however, not many days later, as I was leaving the house, I
was startled to find Mini, seated on a bench near the door, laughing and
talking, with the great Cabuliwallah at her feet. In all her life, it
appeared, my small daughter had never found so patient a listener, save
her father. And already the corner of her little _sari_ was stuffed
with almonds and raisins, the gift of her visitor. "Why did you give her
those?" I said, and taking out an eight-anna bit, I handed it to him.
The man accepted the money without demur, and slipped it into his
pocket.

Alas, on my return an hour later, I found the unfortunate coin had made
twice its own worth of trouble! For the Cabuliwallah had given it to
Mini; and her mother, catching sight of the bright round object, had
pounced on the child with: "Where did you get that eight-anna bit?"

"The Cabuliwallah gave it me," said Mini cheerfully.

"The Cabuliwallah gave it you!" cried her mother much shocked. "O Mini!
how could you take it from him?"

I, entering at the moment, saved her from impending disaster, and
proceeded to make my own inquiries.

It was not the first or second time, I found, that the two had met. The
Cabuliwallah had overcome the child's first terror by a judicious
bribery of nuts and almonds, and the two were now great friends.

They had many quaint jokes, which afforded them much amusement. Seated
in front of him, looking down on his gigantic frame in all her tiny
dignity, Mini would ripple her face with laughter and begin: "O
Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah! what have you got in your bag?"

And he would reply, in the nasal accents of the mountaineer: "An
elephant!" Not much cause for merriment, perhaps; but how they both
enjoyed the fun! And for me, this child's talk with a grown-up man had
always in it something strangely fascinating.

Then the Cabuliwallah, not to be behindhand, would take his turn: "Well,
little one, and when are you going to the father-in-law's house?"

Now most small Bengali maidens have heard long ago about the
father-in-law's house; but we, being a little new-fangled, had kept
these things from our child, and Mini at this question must have been a
trifle bewildered. But she would not show it, and with ready tact
replied: "Are _you_ going there?"

Amongst men of the Cabuliwallah's class, however, it is well known that
the words _father-in-law's house_ have a double meaning. It is a
euphemism for _jail_, the place where we are well cared for, at no
expense to ourselves. In this sense would the sturdy pedlar take my
daughter's question. "Ah," he would say, shaking his fist at an
invisible policeman, "I will thrash my father-in-law!" Hearing this, and
picturing the poor discomfited relative, Mini would go off into peals
of laughter, in which her formidable friend would join.

These were autumn mornings, the very time of year when kings of old went
forth to conquest; and I, never stirring from my little corner in
Calcutta, would let my mind wander over the whole world. At the very
name of another country, my heart would go out to it, and at the sight
of a foreigner in the streets, I would fall to weaving a network of
dreams,--the mountains, the glens, and the forests of his distant home,
with his cottage in its setting, and the free and independent life of
far-away wilds. Perhaps the scenes of travel conjure themselves up
before me and pass and repass in my imagination all the more vividly,
because I lead such a vegetable existence that a call to travel would
fall upon me like a thunder-bolt. In the presence of this Cabuliwallah I
was immediately transported to the foot of arid mountain peaks, with
narrow little defiles twisting in and out amongst their towering
heights. I could see the string of camels bearing the merchandise, and
the company of turbanned merchants carrying some their queer old
firearms, and some their spears, journeying downward towards the plains.
I could see--. But at some such point Mini's mother would intervene,
imploring me to "beware of that man."

Mini's mother is unfortunately a very timid lady. Whenever she hears a
noise in the street, or sees people coming towards the house, she always
jumps to the conclusion that they are either thieves, or drunkards, or
snakes, or tigers, or malaria, or cockroaches, or caterpillars. Even
after all these years of experience, she is not able to overcome her
terror. So she was full of doubts about the Cabuliwallah, and used to
beg me to keep a watchful eye on him.

I tried to laugh her fear gently away, but then she would turn round on
me seriously, and ask me solemn questions:--

Were children never kidnapped?

Was it, then, not true that there was slavery in Cabul?

Was it so very absurd that this big man should be able to carry off a
tiny child?

I urged that, though not impossible, it was highly improbable. But this
was not enough, and her dread persisted. As it was indefinite, however,
it did not seem right to forbid the man the house, and the intimacy went
on unchecked.

Once a year in the middle of January Rahmun, the Cabuliwallah, was in
the habit of returning to his country, and as the time approached he
would be very busy, going from house to house collecting his debts. This
year, however, he could always find time to come and see Mini. It would
have seemed to an outsider that there was some conspiracy between the
two, for when he could not come in the morning, he would appear in the
evening.

Even to me it was a little startling now and then, in the corner of a
dark room, suddenly to surprise this tall, loose-garmented, much
bebagged man; but when Mini would run in smiling, with her "O
Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" and the two friends, so far apart in age,
would subside into their old laughter and their old jokes, I felt
reassured.

One morning, a few days before he had made up his mind to go, I was
correcting my proof sheets in my study. It was chilly weather. Through
the window the rays of the sun touched my feet, and the slight warmth
was very welcome. It was almost eight o'clock, and the early pedestrians
were returning home with their heads covered. All at once I heard an
uproar in the street, and, looking out, saw Rahmun being led away bound
between two policemen, and behind them a crowd of curious boys. There
were blood-stains on the clothes of the Cabuliwallah, and one of the
policemen carried a knife. Hurrying out, I stopped them, and inquired
what it all meant. Partly from one, partly from another, I gathered that
a certain neighbour had owed the pedlar something for a Rampuri shawl,
but had falsely denied having bought it, and that in the course of the
quarrel Rahmun had struck him. Now, in the heat of his excitement, the
prisoner began calling his enemy all sorts of names, when suddenly in a
verandah of my house appeared my little Mini, with her usual
exclamation: "O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" Rahmun's face lighted up as
he turned to her. He had no bag under his arm to-day, so she could not
discuss the elephant with him. She at once therefore proceeded to the
next question: "Are you going to the father-in-law's house?" Rahmun
laughed and said: "Just where I am going, little one!" Then, seeing that
the reply did not amuse the child, he held up his fettered hands. "Ah!"
he said, "I would have thrashed that old father-in-law, but my hands are
bound!"

On a charge of murderous assault, Rahmun was sentenced to some years'
imprisonment.

Time passed away and he was not remembered. The accustomed work in the
accustomed place was ours, and the thought of the once free mountaineer
spending his years in prison seldom or never occurred to us. Even my
light-hearted Mini, I am ashamed to say, forgot her old friend. New
companions filled her life. As she grew older, she spent more of her
time with girls. So much time indeed did she spend with them that she
came no more, as she used to do, to her father's room. I was scarcely on
speaking terms with her.

Years had passed away. It was once more autumn and we had made
arrangements for our Mini's marriage. It was to take place during the
Puja Holidays. With Durga returning to Kailas, the light of our home
also was to depart to her husband's house, and leave her father's in the
shadow.

The morning was bright. After the rains, there was a sense of ablution
in the air, and the sun-rays looked like pure gold. So bright were they,
that they gave a beautiful radiance even to the sordid brick walls of
our Calcutta lanes. Since early dawn that day the wedding-pipes had been
sounding, and at each beat my own heart throbbed. The wail of the tune,
Bhairavi, seemed to intensify my pain at the approaching separation. My
Mini was to be married that night.

From early morning noise and bustle had pervaded the house. In the
courtyard the canopy had to be slung on its bamboo poles; the
chandeliers with their tinkling sound must be hung in each room and
verandah. There was no end of hurry and excitement. I was sitting in my
study, looking through the accounts, when some one entered, saluting
respectfully, and stood before me. It was Rahmun the Cabuliwallah. At
first I did not recognise him. He had no bag, nor the long hair, nor the
same vigour that he used to have. But he smiled, and I knew him again.

"When did you come, Rahmun?" I asked him.

"Last evening," he said, "I was released from jail."

The words struck harsh upon my ears. I had never before talked with one
who had wounded his fellow, and my heart shrank within itself when I
realised this; for I felt that the day would have been better-omened had
he not turned up.

"There are ceremonies going on," I said, "and I am busy. Could you
perhaps come another day?"

At once he turned to go; but as he reached the door he hesitated, and
said: "May I not see the little one, sir, for a moment?" It was his
belief that Mini was still the same. He had pictured her running to him
as she used, calling "O Cabuliwallah! Cabuliwallah!" He had imagined too
that they would laugh and talk together, just as of old. In fact, in
memory of former days he had brought, carefully wrapped up in paper, a
few almonds and raisins and grapes, obtained somehow from a countryman;
for his own little fund was dispersed.

I said again: "There is a ceremony in the house, and you will not be
able to see any one to-day."

The man's face fell. He looked wistfully at me for a moment, then said
"Good morning," and went out.

I felt a little sorry, and would have called him back, but I found he
was returning of his own accord. He came close up to me holding out his
offerings with the words: "I brought these few things, sir, for the
little one. Will you give them to her?"

I took them and was going to pay him, but he caught my hand and said:
"You are very kind, sir! Keep me in your recollection. Do not offer me
money!--You have a little girl: I too have one like her in my own home.
I think of her, and bring fruits to your child--not to make a profit for
myself."

Saying this, he put his hand inside his big loose robe, and brought out
a small and dirty piece of paper. With great care he unfolded this, and
smoothed it out with both hands on my table. It bore the impression of a
little hand. Not a photograph. Not a drawing. The impression of an
ink-smeared hand laid flat on the paper. This touch of his own little
daughter had been always on his heart, as he had come year after year to
Calcutta to sell his wares in the streets.

Tears came to my eyes. I forgot that he was a poor Cabuli fruit-seller,
while I was--. But no, what was I more than he? He also was a father.

That impression of the hand of his little _PAerbati_ in her distant
mountain home reminded me of my own little Mini.

I sent for Mini immediately from the inner apartment. Many difficulties
were raised, but I would not listen. Clad in the red silk of her
wedding-day, with the sandal paste on her forehead, and adorned as a
young bride, Mini came, and stood bashfully before me.

The Cabuliwallah looked a little staggered at the apparition. He could
not revive their old friendship. At last he smiled and said: "Little
one, are you going to your father-in-law's house?"

But Mini now understood the meaning of the word "father-in-law," and she
could not reply to him as of old. She flushed up at the question, and
stood before him with her bride-like face turned down.

I remembered the day when the Cabuliwallah and my Mini had first met,
and I felt sad. When she had gone, Rahmun heaved a deep sigh, and sat
down on the floor. The idea had suddenly come to him that his daughter
too must have grown in this long time, and that he would have to make
friends with her anew. Assuredly he would not find her as he used to
know her. And besides, what might not have happened to her in these
eight years?

The marriage-pipes sounded, and the mild autumn sun streamed round us.
But Rahmun sat in the little Calcutta lane, and saw before him the
barren mountains of Afghanistan.

I took out a bank-note and gave it to him, saying: "Go back to your own
daughter, Rahmun, in your own country, and may the happiness of your
meeting bring good fortune to my child!"

Having made this present, I had to curtail some of the festivities. I
could not have the electric lights I had intended, nor the military
band, and the ladies of the house were despondent at it. But to me the
wedding-feast was all the brighter for the thought that in a distant
land a long-lost father met again with his only child.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =precarious.= From the root "prec," meaning prayer. Compare
      _deprecate_, _imprecation_; "precarious" means, therefore, held
      by entreaty, and thus insecure.

  =impending.= From the Latin "pendere," to hang. Compare _depend_,
      _expend_, _expensive_, _pendant_, _suspend_, _interdependent_,
      _independent_.

  =judicious.= From the root "jus," "jud," meaning law, right. Compare
      _judge_, _judicial_, _judgment_, _just_, _prejudge_, _adjustment_,
      _adjudicate_.

  =euphemism.= A Greek root "phe," meaning speech. Compare _blasphemy_.

  =transported.= From the Latin "portare," to carry. Compare _porter_,
      _import_, _export_, _deport_, _support_, _deportation_.

  =intervene.= From the Latin "venire," to come. Compare _convenient_,
      _convene_, _supervene_, _prevent_.

  =conclusion.= From the Latin "claudere," to close, shut. Compare
      _include_, _preclude_, _exclude_, _exclusive_, _exclusion_.

  =exclamation.= From the Latin "clamare," to cry out. Compare
      _clamour_, _proclaim_, _proclamation_, _clamorous_, _disclaim_,
      _declaim_.

  =separation.= From the Latin "parare," to make ready. Compare
      _prepare_, _preparation_, _compare_, _comparison_, _comparative_.

  =recollect.= From the Latin "legere," to choose. Compare _collect_,
      _elect_, _election_, _college_, _eligible_.

  =impression.= From the Latin "premere," to press. Compare
      _impressive_, _depress_, _express_, _suppress_, _oppress_,
      _pressure_.

  =photograph.= From two Greek roots "phAt," meaning light and "graph,"
      meaning to write. Compare _epigraph_, _epigram_, _photographic_,
      _phosphorus_, _graph_, _diagram_.

  =intend.= From the Latin "tendere," meaning to stretch. Compare
      _extend_, _superintend_, _attend_, _attendant_, _extensive_,
      _tense_, _pretend_, _distend_, _contend_.




THE HOME-COMING




II

THE HOME-COMING


Phatik Chakravorti was ringleader among the boys of the village. A new
mischief got into his head. There was a heavy log lying on the mud-flat
of the river waiting to be shaped into a mast for a boat. He decided
that they should all work together to shift the log by main force from
its place and roll it away. The owner of the log would be angry and
surprised, and they would all enjoy the fun. Every one seconded the
proposal, and it was carried unanimously.

But just as the fun was about to begin, MAekhan, Phatik's younger
brother, sauntered up and sat down on the log in front of them all
without a word. The boys were puzzled for a moment. He was pushed,
rather timidly, by one of the boys and told to get up; but he remained
quite unconcerned. He appeared like a young philosopher meditating on
the futility of games. Phatik was furious. "MAekhan," he cried, "if you
don't get down this minute I'll thrash you!"

MAekhan only moved to a more comfortable position.

Now, if Phatik was to keep his regal dignity before the public, it was
clear he ought to carry out his threat. But his courage failed him at
the crisis. His fertile brain, however, rapidly seized upon a new
manA"uvre which would discomfit his brother and afford his followers an
added amusement. He gave the word of command to roll the log and MAekhan
over together. MAekhan heard the order and made it a point of honour to
stick on. But he overlooked the fact, like those who attempt earthly
fame in other matters, that there was peril in it.

The boys began to heave at the log with all their might, calling out,
"One, two, three, go!" At the word "go" the log went; and with it went
MAekhan's philosophy, glory and all.

The other boys shouted themselves hoarse with delight. But Phatik was a
little frightened. He knew what was coming. And, sure enough, MAekhan
rose from Mother Earth blind as Fate and screaming like the Furies. He
rushed at Phatik and scratched his face and beat him and kicked him, and
then went crying home. The first act of the drama was over.

Phatik wiped his face, and sat down on the edge of a sunken barge by the
river bank, and began to chew a piece of grass. A boat came up to the
landing and a middle-aged man, with grey hair and dark moustache,
stepped on shore. He saw the boy sitting there doing nothing and asked
him where the Chakravortis lived. Phatik went on chewing the grass and
said: "Over there," but it was quite impossible to tell where he
pointed. The stranger asked him again. He swung his legs to and fro on
the side of the barge and said: "Go and find out," and continued to chew
the grass as before.

But now a servant came down from the house and told Phatik his mother
wanted him. Phatik refused to move. But the servant was the master on
this occasion. He took Phatik up roughly and carried him, kicking and
struggling in impotent rage.

When Phatik came into the house, his mother saw him. She called out
angrily: "So you have been hitting MAekhan again?"

Phatik answered indignantly: "No, I haven't! Who told you that?"

His mother shouted: "Don't tell lies! You have."

Phatik said sullenly: "I tell you, I haven't. You ask MAekhan!" But
MAekhan thought it best to stick to his previous statement. He said:
"Yes, mother. Phatik did hit me."

Phatik's patience was already exhausted. He could not bear this
injustice. He rushed at MAekhan and hammered him with blows: "Take
that," he cried, "and that, and that, for telling lies."

His mother took MAekhan's side in a moment, and pulled Phatik away,
beating him with her hands. When Phatik pushed her aside, she shouted
out: "What! you little villain! Would you hit your own mother?"

It was just at this critical juncture that the grey-haired stranger
arrived. He asked what was the matter. Phatik looked sheepish and
ashamed.

But when his mother stepped back and looked at the stranger, her anger
was changed to surprise. For she recognized her brother and cried: "Why,
Dada! Where have you come from?"

As she said these words, she bowed to the ground and touched his feet.
Her brother had gone away soon after she had married; and he had started
business in Bombay. His sister had lost her husband while he was there.
Bishamber had now come back to Calcutta and had at once made enquiries
about his sister. He had then hastened to see her as soon as he found
out where she was.

The next few days were full of rejoicing. The brother asked after the
education of the two boys. He was told by his sister that Phatik was a
perpetual nuisance. He was lazy, disobedient, and wild. But MAekhan was
as good as gold, as quiet as a lamb, and very fond of reading.
Bishamber kindly offered to take Phatik off his sister's hands and
educate him with his own children in Calcutta. The widowed mother
readily agreed. When his uncle asked Phatik if he would like to go to
Calcutta with him, his joy knew no bounds and he said: "Oh, yes, uncle!"
in a way that made it quite clear that he meant it.

It was an immense relief to the mother to get rid of Phatik. She had a
prejudice against the boy, and no love was lost between the two
brothers. She was in daily fear that he would either drown MAekhan some
day in the river, or break his head in a fight, or run him into some
danger. At the same time she was a little distressed to see Phatik's
extreme eagerness to get away.

Phatik, as soon as all was settled, kept asking his uncle every minute
when they were to start. He was on pins and needles all day long with
excitement and lay awake most of the night. He bequeathed to MAekhan, in
perpetuity, his fishing-rod, his big kite, and his marbles. Indeed, at
this time of departure, his generosity towards MAekhan was unbounded.

When they reached Calcutta, Phatik made the acquaintance of his aunt for
the first time. She was by no means pleased with this unnecessary
addition to her family. She found her own three boys quite enough to
manage without taking any one else. And to bring a village lad of
fourteen into their midst was terribly upsetting. Bishamber should
really have thought twice before committing such an indiscretion.

In this world of human affairs there is no worse nuisance than a boy at
the age of fourteen. He is neither ornamental nor useful. It is
impossible to shower affection on him as on a little boy; and he is
always getting in the way. If he talks with a childish lisp he is called
a baby, and if he answers in a grown-up way he is called impertinent. In
fact any talk at all from him is resented. Then he is at the
unattractive, growing age. He grows out of his clothes with indecent
haste; his voice grows hoarse and breaks and quavers; his face grows
suddenly angular and unsightly. It is easy to excuse the shortcomings of
early childhood, but it is hard to tolerate even unavoidable lapses in a
boy of fourteen. The lad himself becomes painfully self-conscious. When
he talks with elderly people he is either unduly forward, or else so
unduly shy that he appears ashamed of his very existence.

Yet it is at this very age when, in his heart of hearts, a young lad
most craves for recognition and love; and he becomes the devoted slave
of any one who shows him consideration. But none dare openly love him,
for that would be regarded as undue indulgence and therefore bad for
the boy. So, what with scolding and chiding, he becomes very much like a
stray dog that has lost his master.

For a boy of fourteen his own home is the only Paradise. To live in a
strange house with strange people is little short of torture, while the
height of bliss is to receive the kind looks of women and never to be
slighted by them.

It was anguish to Phatik to be the unwelcome guest in his aunt's house,
despised by this elderly woman and slighted on every occasion. If ever
she asked him to do anything for her, he would be so overjoyed that he
would overdo it; and then she would tell him not to be so stupid, but to
get on with his lessons.

The cramped atmosphere of neglect oppressed Phatik so much that he felt
that he could hardly breathe. He wanted to go out into the open country
and fill his lungs with fresh air. But there was no open country to go
to. Surrounded on all sides by Calcutta houses and walls, he would dream
night after night of his village home and long to be back there. He
remembered the glorious meadow where he used to fly his kite all day
long; the broad river-banks where he would wander about the live-long
day singing and shouting for joy; the narrow brook where he could go and
dive and swim at any time he liked. He thought of his band of boy
companions over whom he was despot; and, above all, the memory of that
tyrant mother of his, who had such a prejudice against him, occupied him
day and night. A kind of physical love like that of animals, a longing
to be in the presence of the one who is loved, an inexpressible
wistfulness during absence, a silent cry of the inmost heart for the
mother, like the lowing of a calf in the twilight,--this love, which was
almost an animal instinct, agitated the shy, nervous, lean, uncouth and
ugly boy. No one could understand it, but it preyed upon his mind
continually.

There was no more backward boy in the whole school than Phatik. He gaped
and remained silent when the teacher asked him a question, and like an
overladen ass patiently suffered all the blows that came down on his
back. When other boys were out at play, he stood wistfully by the window
and gazed at the roofs of the distant houses. And if by chance he espied
children playing on the open terrace of any roof, his heart would ache
with longing.

One day he summoned up all his courage and asked his uncle: "Uncle, when
can I go home?"

His uncle answered: "Wait till the holidays come."

But the holidays would not come till October and there was a long time
still to wait.

One day Phatik lost his lesson book. Even with the help of books he had
found it very difficult indeed to prepare his lesson. Now it was
impossible. Day after day the teacher would cane him unmercifully. His
condition became so abjectly miserable that even his cousins were
ashamed to own him. They began to jeer and insult him more than the
other boys. He went to his aunt at last and told her that he had lost
his book.

His aunt pursed her lips in contempt and said: "You great clumsy,
country lout! How can I afford, with all my family, to buy you new books
five times a month?"

That night, on his way back from school, Phatik had a bad headache with
a fit of shivering. He felt he was going to have an attack of malarial
fever. His one great fear was that he would be a nuisance to his aunt.

The next morning Phatik was nowhere to be seen. All searches in the
neighbourhood proved futile. The rain had been pouring in torrents all
night, and those who went out in search of the boy got drenched through
to the skin. At last Bishamber asked help from the police.

At the end of the day a police van stopped at the door before the house.
It was still raining and the streets were all flooded. Two constables
brought out Phatik in their arms and placed him before Bishamber. He
was wet through from head to foot, muddy all over, his face and eyes
flushed red with fever and his limbs trembling. Bishamber carried him in
his arms and took him into the inner apartments. When his wife saw him
she exclaimed: "What a heap of trouble this boy has given us! Hadn't you
better send him home?"

Phatik heard her words and sobbed out loud: "Uncle, I was just going
home; but they dragged me back again."

The fever rose very high, and all that night the boy was delirious.
Bishamber brought in a doctor. Phatik opened his eyes, flushed with
fever, and looked up to the ceiling and said vacantly: "Uncle, have the
holidays come yet?"

Bishamber wiped the tears from his own eyes and took Phatik's lean and
burning hands in his own and sat by him through the night. The boy began
again to mutter. At last his voice became excited: "Mother!" he cried,
"don't beat me like that.... Mother! I _am_ telling the truth!"

The next day Phatik became conscious for a short time. He turned his
eyes about the room, as if expecting some one to come. At last, with an
air of disappointment, his head sank back on the pillow. He turned his
face to the wall with a deep sigh.

Bishamber knew his thoughts and bending down his head whispered:
"Phatik, I have sent for your mother."

The day went by. The doctor said in a troubled voice that the boy's
condition was very critical.

Phatik began to cry out: "By the mark--three fathoms. By the mark--four
fathoms. By the mark----." He had heard the sailor on the river-steamer
calling out the mark on the plumb-line. Now he was himself plumbing an
unfathomable sea.

Later in the day Phatik's mother burst into the room, like a whirlwind,
and began to toss from side to side and moan and cry in a loud voice.

Bishamber tried to calm her agitation, but she flung herself on the bed,
and cried: "Phatik, my darling, my darling."

Phatik stopped his restless movements for a moment. His hands ceased
beating up and down. He said: "Eh?"

The mother cried again: "Phatik, my darling, my darling."

Phatik very slowly turned his head and without seeing anybody said:
"Mother, the holidays have come."


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =proposal.= From the Latin word "ponere," to place. Compare
      _position_, _post_, _depose_, _impose_, _component_,
      _composition_, _repose_.

  =unanimously.= From the Latin "unus," one, and "animus," mind. Compare
      _magnanimous_, _pusillanimous_.

  =philosopher.= From the Greek "philos," a friend, and "sophia,"
      wisdom. Compare _philology_, _philanthropy_, _theosophy_.

  =moustache.= A French word which has found its home in English. French
      is frequently giving to English new words. Compare, in this story,
      _manA"uvre_, _discomfit_, _mischief_.

  =juncture.= From the Latin "jungere," to join. Compare _junction_,
      _conjunction_, _subjunctive_, _adjunct_.

  =unattractive.= From the negative "un," meaning "not," and the root
      "tract-," meaning to draw. Compare _traction_, _tractor_,
      _attract_, _extract_, _subtract_.

  =atmosphere.= From the Greek word "atmos," the air, and "sphaira," a
      "globe." Compare _sphere_, _hemisphere_, _photosphere_.

  =wistfulness.= Probably from the English word "wish," wishfulness.
      Several, however, regard it as coming from an old word "whist" or
      "wist," meaning silent. The vernacular word "udAes" has the same
      meaning.

  =abjectly.= From the Latin word "jacere," to throw. Compare
      _ad-jec-tive_, _subject_, _object_, _project_, _inject_, _reject_.

  =neighbourhood.= From a Saxon word meaning near, nigh; "hood" or
      "head" is a common addition to Saxon words denoting the quality or
      character. Compare _knighthood_, _manhood_, _boyhood_,
      _womanhood_.

  =holidays.= This word is made up of two words, "holy" and "days." The
      religious days of the Church were those on which no one worked and
      thus they got the meaning of holidays as opposed to working days.




ONCE THERE WAS A KING




III

ONCE THERE WAS A KING


"Once upon a time there was a king."

When we were children there was no need to know who the king in the
fairy story was. It didn't matter whether he was called Shiladitya or
Shaliban, whether he lived at Kashi or Kanauj. The thing that made a
seven-year-old boy's heart go thump, thump with delight was this one
sovereign truth, this reality of all realities: "Once there was a king."

But the readers of this modern age are far more exact and exacting. When
they hear such an opening to a story, they are at once critical and
suspicious. They apply the searchlight of science to its legendary haze
and ask: "Which king?"

The story-tellers have become more precise in their turn. They are no
longer content with the old indefinite, "There was a king," but assume
instead a look of profound learning and begin: "Once there was a king
named Ajatasatru."

The modern reader's curiosity, however, is not so easily satisfied. He
blinks at the author through his scientific spectacles and asks again:
"Which Ajatasatru?"

When we were young, we understood all sweet things; and we could detect
the sweets of a fairy story by an unerring science of our own. We never
cared for such useless things as knowledge. We only cared for truth. And
our unsophisticated little hearts knew well where the Crystal Palace of
Truth lay and how to reach it. But to-day we are expected to write pages
of facts, while the truth is simply this:

"There was a king."

I remember vividly that evening in Calcutta when the fairy story began.
The rain and the storm had been incessant. The whole of the city was
flooded. The water was knee-deep in our lane. I had a straining hope,
which was almost a certainty, that my tutor would be prevented from
coming that evening. I sat on the stool in the far corner of the
verandah looking down the lane, with a heart beating faster and faster.
Every minute I kept my eye on the rain, and when it began to diminish I
prayed with all my might: "Please, God, send some more rain till
half-past seven is over." For I was quite ready to believe that there
was no other need for rain except to protect one helpless boy one
evening in one corner of Calcutta from the deadly clutches of his
tutor.

If not in answer to my prayer, at any rate according to some grosser law
of nature, the rain did not give up.

But, alas, nor did my teacher!

Exactly to the minute, in the bend of the lane, I saw his approaching
umbrella. The great bubble of hope burst in my breast, and my heart
collapsed. Truly, if there is a punishment to fit the crime after death,
then my tutor will be born again as me, and I shall be born as my tutor.

As soon as I saw his umbrella I ran as hard as I could to my mother's
room. My mother and my grandmother were sitting opposite one another
playing cards by the light of a lamp. I ran into the room, and flung
myself on the bed beside my mother, and said:

"Mother, the tutor has come, and I have such a bad headache; couldn't I
have no lessons to-day?"

I hope no child of immature age will be allowed to read this story, and
I sincerely trust it will not be used in text-books or primers for
junior classes. For what I did was dreadfully bad, and I received no
punishment whatever. On the contrary, my wickedness was crowned with
success.

My mother said to me: "All right," and turning to the servant added:
"Tell the tutor that he can go back home."

It was perfectly plain that she didn't think my illness very serious, as
she went on with her game as before and took no further notice. And I
also, burying my head in the pillow, laughed to my heart's content. We
perfectly understood one another, my mother and I.

But every one must know how hard it is for a boy of seven years old to
keep up the illusion of illness for a long time. After about a minute I
got hold of Grandmother and said: "Grannie, do tell me a story."

I had to ask this many times. Grannie and Mother went on playing cards
and took no notice. At last Mother said to me: "Child, don't bother.
Wait till we've finished our game." But I persisted: "Grannie, do tell
me a story." I told Mother she could finish her game to-morrow, but she
must let Grannie tell me a story there and then.

At last Mother threw down the cards and said: "You had better do what he
wants. I can't manage him." Perhaps she had it in her mind that she
would have no tiresome tutor on the morrow, while I should be obliged to
be back at those stupid lessons.

As soon as ever Mother had given way, I rushed at Grannie. I got hold
of her hand, and, dancing with delight, dragged her inside my mosquito
curtain on to the bed. I clutched hold of the bolster with both hands in
my excitement, and jumped up and down with joy, and when I had got a
little quieter said: "Now, Grannie, let's have the story!"

Grannie went on: "And the king had a queen."

That was good to begin with. He had only one!

It is usual for kings in fairy stories to be extravagant in queens. And
whenever we hear that there are two queens our hearts begin to sink. One
is sure to be unhappy. But in Grannie's story that danger was past. He
had only one queen.

We next hear that the king had not got any son. At the age of seven I
didn't think there was any need to bother if a man had no son. He might
only have been in the way.

Nor are we greatly excited when we hear that the king has gone away into
the forest to practise austerities in order to get a son. There was only
one thing that would have made me go into the forest, and that was to
get away from my tutor!

But the king left behind with his queen a small girl, who grew up into a
beautiful princess.

Twelve years pass away, and the king goes on practising austerities, and
never thinks all this while of his beautiful daughter. The princess has
reached the full bloom of her youth. The age of marriage has passed,
but the king does not return. And the queen pines away with grief and
cries: "Is my golden daughter destined to die unmarried? Ah me, what a
fate is mine!"

Then the queen sent men to the king to entreat him earnestly to come
back for a single night and take one meal in the palace. And the king
consented.

The queen cooked with her own hand, and with the greatest care,
sixty-four dishes. She made a seat for him of sandal-wood and arranged
the food in plates of gold and cups of silver. The princess stood behind
with the peacock-tail fan in her hand. The king, after twelve years'
absence, came into the house, and the princess waved the fan, lighting
up all the room with her beauty. The king looked in his daughter's face
and forgot to take his food.

At last he asked his queen: "Pray, who is this girl whose beauty shines
as the gold image of the goddess? Whose daughter is she?"

The queen beat her forehead and cried: "Ah, how evil is my fate! Do you
not know your own daughter?"

The king was struck with amazement. He said at last: "My tiny daughter
has grown to be a woman."

"What else?" the queen said with a sigh. "Do you not know that twelve
years have passed by?"

"But why did you not give her in marriage?" asked the king.

"You were away," the queen said. "And how could I find her a suitable
husband?"

The king became vehement with excitement. "The first man I see
to-morrow," he said, "when I come out of the palace shall marry her."

The princess went on waving her fan of peacock feathers, and the king
finished his meal.

The next morning, as the king came out of his palace, he saw the son of
a Brahman gathering sticks in the forest outside the palace gates. His
age was about seven or eight.

The King said: "I will marry my daughter to him."

Who can interfere with a king's command? At once the boy was called, and
the marriage garlands were exchanged between him and the princess.

At this point I came up close to my wise Grannie and asked her eagerly:
"When then?"

In the bottom of my heart there was a devout wish to substitute myself
for that fortunate wood-gatherer of seven years old. The night was
resonant with the patter of rain. The earthen lamp by my bedside was
burning low. My grandmother's voice droned on as she told the story.
And all these things served to create in a corner of my credulous heart
the belief that I had been gathering sticks in the dawn of some
indefinite time in the kingdom of some unknown king, and in a moment
garlands had been exchanged between me and the princess, beautiful as
the Goddess of Grace. She had a gold band on her hair and gold earrings
in her ears. She had a necklace and bracelets of gold, and a golden
waist-chain round her waist, and a pair of golden anklets tinkled above
her feet.

If my grandmother were an author, how many explanations she would have
to offer for this little story! First of all, every one would ask why
the king remained twelve years in the forest? Secondly, why should the
king's daughter remain unmarried all that while? This would be regarded
as absurd.

Even if she could have got so far without a quarrel, still there would
have been a great hue and cry about the marriage itself. First, it never
happened. Secondly, how could there be a marriage between a princess of
the Warrior Caste and a boy of the priestly Brahman Caste? Her readers
would have imagined at once that the writer was preaching against our
social customs in an underhand way. And they would write letters to the
papers.

So I pray with all my heart that my grandmother may be born a
grandmother again, and not through some cursed fate take birth as her
luckless grandson.

With a throb of joy and delight, I asked Grannie: "What then?"

Grannie went on: Then the princess took her little husband away in great
distress, and built a large palace with seven wings, and began to
cherish her husband with great care.

I jumped up and down in my bed and clutched at the bolster more tightly
than ever and said: "What then?"

Grannie continued: The little boy went to school and learnt many lessons
from his teachers, and as he grew up his class-fellows began to ask him:
"Who is that beautiful lady living with you in the palace with the seven
wings?"

The Brahman's son was eager to know who she was. He could only remember
how one day he had been gathering sticks and a great disturbance arose.
But all that was so long ago that he had no clear recollection.

Four or five years passed in this way. His companions always asked him:
"Who is that beautiful lady in the palace with the seven wings?" And the
Brahman's son would come back from school and sadly tell the princess:
"My school companions always ask me who is that beautiful lady in the
palace with the seven wings, and I can give them no reply. Tell me, oh,
tell me, who you are!"

The princess said: "Let it pass to-day. I will tell you some other day."
And every day the Brahman's son would ask: "Who are you?" and the
princess would reply: "Let it pass to-day. I will tell you some other
day." In this manner four or five more years passed away.

At last the Brahman's son became very impatient and said: "If you do not
tell me to-day who you are, O beautiful lady, I will leave this palace
with the seven wings." Then the princess said: "I will certainly tell
you to-morrow."

Next day the Brahman's son, as soon as he came home from school, said:
"Now, tell me who you are." The princess said: "To-night I will tell you
after supper, when you are in bed."

The Brahman's son said: "Very well"; and he began to count the hours in
expectation of the night. And the princess, on her side, spread white
flowers over the golden bed, and lighted a gold lamp with fragrant oil,
and adorned her hair, and dressed herself in a beautiful robe of blue,
and began to count the hours in expectation of the night.

That evening when her husband, the Brahman's son, had finished his meal,
too excited almost to eat, and had gone to the golden bed in the
bedchamber strewn with flowers, he said to himself: "To-night I shall
surely know who this beautiful lady is in the palace with the seven
wings."

The princess took for her food that which was left over by her husband,
and slowly entered the bedchamber. She had to answer that night the
question, who was the beautiful lady that lived in the palace with the
seven wings. And as she went up to the bed to tell him she found a
serpent had crept out of the flowers and had bitten the Brahman's son.
Her boy-husband was lying on the bed of flowers, with face pale in
death.

My heart suddenly ceased to throb, and I asked with choking voice: "What
then?"

Grannie said: "Then ..."

But what is the use of going on any further with the story? It would
only lead on to what was more and more impossible. The boy of seven did
not know that, if there were some "What then?" after death, no
grandmother of a grandmother could tell us all about it.

But the child's faith never admits defeat, and it would snatch at the
mantle of death itself to turn him back. It would be outrageous for him
to think that such a story of one teacherless evening could so suddenly
come to a stop. Therefore the grandmother had to call back her story
from the ever-shut chamber of the great End, but she does it so simply:
it is merely by floating the dead body on a banana stem on the river,
and having some incantations read by a magician. But in that rainy night
and in the dim light of a lamp death loses all its horror in the mind of
the boy, and seems nothing more than a deep slumber of a single night.
When the story ends the tired eyelids are weighed down with sleep. Thus
it is that we send the little body of the child floating on the back of
sleep over the still water of time, and then in the morning read a few
verses of incantation to restore him to the world of life and light.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =sovereign.= This word is taken directly from the French language. It
      is connected with the Latin "supremus."

  =blinks.= Many English words are made up from the supposed sound or
      motion to be represented. Compare _to splash_, _to plump_, _to
      quack_, _to throb_, _to swish_.

  =suspicious.= From the Latin word "spicere," to look. Compare
      _auspicious_, _respect_, _inspect_, _aspect._

  =unsophisticated.= This word comes from the Greek "sophistes," meaning
      a sophist, that is to say, one who makes a pretence of being wise.
      Unsophisticated means one who makes no pretence to be learned.

  =umbrella.= This word has come into English from the Italian language.
      "Umbra" in Latin means "shade" and Ombrella in Italian means
      "little shade."

  =extravagant.= From the Latin root "vag," meaning to wander. The word
      means "wandering outside" and so "going beyond bounds." Compare
      _vagrant_, _vagabond_, _vague._

  =explanation.= From the Latin "planus," meaning plain. Compare
      _explanatory_, _explain_, _plain_, _plane._

  =incantation.= From the Latin "cantare," to chant, something chanted
      over a person.

  =magician.= From the Greek "magus," an astrologer. Compare _magic_,
      _the Magi_, _magical._




THE CHILD'S RETURN




IV

THE CHILD'S RETURN


I

Raicharan was twelve years old when he came as a servant to his master's
house. He belonged to the same caste as his master and was given his
master's little son to nurse. As time went on the boy left Raicharan's
arms to go to school. From school he went on to college, and after
college he entered the judicial service. Always, until he married,
Raicharan was his sole attendant.

But when a mistress came into the house, Raicharan found two masters
instead of one. All his former influence passed to the new mistress.
This was compensated by a fresh arrival. Anukul had a son born to him
and Raicharan by his unsparing attentions soon got a complete hold over
the child. He used to toss him up in his arms, call to him in absurd
baby language, put his face close to the baby's and draw it away again
with a laugh.

Presently the child was able to crawl and cross the doorway. When
Raicharan went to catch him, he would scream with mischievous laughter
and make for safety. Raicharan was amazed at the profound skill and
exact judgment the baby showed when pursued. He would say to his
mistress with a look of awe and mystery: "Your son will be a judge some
day."

New wonders came in their turn. When the baby began to toddle, that was
to Raicharan an epoch in human history. When he called his father Ba-ba
and his mother Ma-ma and Raicharan Chan-na, then Raicharan's ecstasy
knew no bounds. He went out to tell the news to all the world.

After a while Raicharan was asked to show his ingenuity in other ways.
He had, for instance, to play the part of a horse, holding the reins
between his teeth and prancing with his feet. He had also to wrestle
with his little charge; and if he could not, by a wrestler's trick, fall
on his back defeated at the end a great outcry was certain.

About this time Anukul was transferred to a district on the banks of the
Padma. On his way through Calcutta he bought his son a little go-cart.
He bought him also a yellow satin waistcoat, a gold-laced cap, and some
gold bracelets and anklets. Raicharan was wont to take these out and put
them on his little charge, with ceremonial pride, whenever they went for
a walk.

Then came the rainy season and day after day the rain poured down in
torrents. The hungry river, like an enormous serpent, swallowed down
terraces, villages, cornfields, and covered with its flood the tall
grasses and wild casuarinas on the sandbanks. From time to time there
was a deep thud as the river-banks crumbled. The unceasing roar of the
main current could be heard from far away. Masses of foam, carried
swiftly past, proved to the eye the swiftness of the stream.

One afternoon the rain cleared. It was cloudy, but cool and bright.
Raicharan's little despot did not want to stay in on such a fine
afternoon. His lordship climbed into the go-cart. Raicharan, between the
shafts, dragged him slowly along till he reached the rice-fields on the
banks of the river. There was no one in the fields and no boat on the
stream. Across the water, on the farther side, the clouds were rifted in
the west. The silent ceremonial of the setting sun was revealed in all
its glowing splendour. In the midst of that stillness the child, all of
a sudden, pointed with his finger in front of him and cried: "Chan-na!
Pitty fow."

Close by on a mud-flat stood a large _Kadamba_ tree in full flower. My
lord, the baby, looked at it with greedy eyes and Raicharan knew his
meaning. Only a short time before he had made, out of these very flower
balls, a small go-cart; and the child had been so entirely happy
dragging it about with a string, that for the whole day Raicharan was
not asked to put on the reins at all. He was promoted from a horse into
a groom.

But Raicharan had no wish that evening to go splashing knee-deep through
the mud to reach the flowers. So he quickly pointed his finger in the
opposite direction, calling out: "Look, baby, look! Look at the bird."
And with all sorts of curious noises he pushed the go-cart rapidly away
from the tree.

But a child, destined to be a judge, cannot be put off so easily. And
besides, there was at the time nothing to attract his eyes. And you
cannot keep up for ever the pretence of an imaginary bird.

The little Master's mind was made up, and Raicharan was at his wits'
end. "Very well, baby," he said at last, "you sit still in the cart, and
I'll go and get you the pretty flower. Only mind you don't go near the
water."

As he said this, he made his legs bare to the knee, and waded through
the oozing mud towards the tree.

The moment Raicharan had gone, his little Master's thoughts went off at
racing speed to the forbidden water. The baby saw the river rushing by,
splashing and gurgling as it went. It seemed as though the disobedient
wavelets themselves were running away from some greater Raicharan with
the laughter of a thousand children. At the sight of their mischief, the
heart of the human child grew excited and restless. He got down
stealthily from the go-cart and toddled off towards the river. On his
way he picked up a small stick and leant over the bank of the stream
pretending to fish. The mischievous fairies of the river with their
mysterious voices seemed inviting him into their play-house.

Raicharan had plucked a handful of flowers from the tree and was
carrying them back in the end of his cloth, with his face wreathed in
smiles. But when he reached the go-cart there was no one there. He
looked on all sides and there was no one there. He looked back at the
cart and there was no one there.

In that first terrible moment his blood froze within him. Before his
eyes the whole universe swam round like a dark mist. From the depth of
his broken heart he gave one piercing cry: "Master, Master, little
Master."

But no voice answered "Chan-na." No child laughed mischievously back: no
scream of baby delight welcomed his return. Only the river ran on with
its splashing, gurgling noise as before,--as though it knew nothing at
all and had no time to attend to such a tiny human event as the death
of a child.

As the evening passed by Raicharan's mistress became very anxious. She
sent men out on all sides to search. They went with lanterns in their
hands and reached at last the banks of the Padma. There they found
Raicharan rushing up and down the fields, like a stormy wind, shouting
the cry of despair: "Master, Master, little Master!"

When they got Raicharan home at last, he fell prostrate at the feet of
his mistress. They shook him, and questioned him, and asked him
repeatedly where he had left the child; but all he could say was that he
knew nothing.

Though every one held the opinion that the Padma had swallowed the
child, there was a lurking doubt left in the mind. For a band of gipsies
had been noticed outside the village that afternoon, and some suspicion
rested on them. The mother went so far in her wild grief as to think it
possible that Raicharan himself had stolen the child. She called him
aside with piteous entreaty and said: "Raicharan, give me back my baby.
Give me back my child. Take from me any money you ask, but give me back
my child!"

Raicharan only beat his forehead in reply. His mistress ordered him out
of the house.

Anukul tried to reason his wife out of this wholly unjust suspicion:
"Why on earth," he said, "should he commit such a crime as that?"

The mother only replied: "The baby had gold ornaments on his body. Who
knows?"

It was impossible to reason with her after that.


II

Raicharan went back to his own village. Up to this time he had had no
son, and there was no hope that any child would now be born to him. But
it came about before the end of a year that his wife gave birth to a son
and died.

An overwhelming resentment at first grew up in Raicharan's heart at the
sight of this new baby. At the back of his mind was resentful suspicion
that it had come as a usurper in place of the little Master. He also
thought it would be a grave offence to be happy with a son of his own
after what had happened to his master's little child. Indeed, if it had
not been for a widowed sister, who mothered the new baby, it would not
have lived long.

But a change gradually came over Raicharan's mind. A wonderful thing
happened. This new baby in turn began to crawl about, and cross the
doorway with mischief in its face. It also showed an amusing cleverness
in making its escape to safety. Its voice, its sounds of laughter and
tears, its gestures, were those of the little Master. On some days, when
Raicharan listened to its crying, his heart suddenly began thumping
wildly against his ribs, and it seemed to him that his former little
Master was crying somewhere in the unknown land of death because he had
lost his Chan-na.

Phailna (for that was the name Raicharan's sister gave to the new baby)
soon began to talk. It learnt to say Ba-ba and Ma-ma with a baby accent.
When Raicharan heard those familiar sounds the mystery suddenly became
clear. The little Master could not cast off the spell of his Chan-na and
therefore he had been reborn in his own house.

The three arguments in favour of this were, to Raicharan, altogether
beyond dispute:

The new baby was born soon after his little master's death.

His wife could never have accumulated such merit as to give birth to a
son in middle age.

The new baby walked with a toddle and called out Ba-ba and Ma-ma.--There
was no sign lacking which marked out the future judge.

Then suddenly Raicharan remembered that terrible accusation of the
mother. "Ah," he said to himself with amazement, "the mother's heart was
right. She knew I had stolen her child."

When once he had come to this conclusion, he was filled with remorse for
his past neglect. He now gave himself over, body and soul, to the new
baby and became its devoted attendant. He began to bring it up as if it
were the son of a rich man. He bought a go-cart, a yellow satin
waistcoat, and a gold-embroidered cap. He melted down the ornaments of
his dead wife and made gold bangles and anklets. He refused to let the
little child play with any one of the neighbourhood and became himself
its sole companion day and night. As the baby grew up to boyhood, he was
so petted and spoilt and clad in such finery that the village children
would call him "Your Lordship," and jeer at him; and older people
regarded Raicharan as unaccountably crazy about the child.

At last the time came for the boy to go to school. Raicharan sold his
small piece of land and went to Calcutta. There he got employment with
great difficulty as a servant and sent Phailna to school. He spared no
pains to give him the best education, the best clothes, the best food.
Meanwhile, he himself lived on a mere handful of rice and would say in
secret: "Ah, my little Master, my dear little Master, you loved me so
much that you came back to my house! You shall never suffer from any
neglect of mine."

Twelve years passed away in this manner. The boy was able to read and
write well. He was bright and healthy and good-looking. He paid a great
deal of attention to his personal appearance and was specially careful
in parting his hair. He was inclined to extravagance and finery and
spent money freely. He could never quite look on Raicharan as a father,
because, though fatherly in affection, he had the manner of a servant. A
further fault was this, that Raicharan kept secret from every one that
he himself was the father of the child.

The students of the hostel, where Phailna was a boarder, were greatly
amused by Raicharan's country manners, and I have to confess that behind
his father's back Phailna joined in their fun. But, in the bottom of
their hearts, all the students loved the innocent and tender-hearted old
man, and Phailna was very fond of him also. But, as I have said before,
he loved him with a kind of condescension.

Raicharan grew older and older, and his employer was continually finding
fault with him for his incompetent work. He had been starving himself
for the boy's sake, so he had grown physically weak and no longer up to
his daily task. He would forget things and his mind became dull and
stupid. But his employer expected a full servant's work out of him and
would not brook excuses. The money that Raicharan had brought with him
from the sale of his land was exhausted. The boy was continually
grumbling about his clothes and asking for more money.


III

Raicharan made up his mind. He gave up the situation where he was
working as a servant, and left some money with Phailna and said: "I have
some business to do at home in my village, and shall be back soon."

He went off at once to Baraset where Anukul was magistrate. Anukul's
wife was still broken down with grief. She had had no other child.

One day Anukul was resting after a long and weary day in court. His wife
was buying, at an exorbitant price, a herb from a mendicant quack, which
was said to ensure the birth of a child. A voice of greeting was heard
in the courtyard. Anukul went out to see who was there. It was
Raicharan. Anukul's heart was softened when he saw his old servant. He
asked him many questions and offered to take him back into service.

Raicharan smiled faintly and said in reply: "I want to make obeisance to
my mistress."

Anukul went with Raicharan into the house, where the mistress did not
receive him as warmly as his old master. Raicharan took no notice of
this, but folded his hands and said: "It was not the Padma that stole
your baby. It was I."

Anukul exclaimed: "Great God! Eh! What! Where is he?"

Raicharan replied: "He is with me. I will bring him the day after
to-morrow."

It was Sunday. There was no magistrate's court sitting. Both husband and
wife were looking expectantly along the road, waiting from early morning
for Raicharan's appearance. At ten o'clock he came leading Phailna by
the hand.

Anukul's wife, without a question, took the boy into her lap and was
wild with excitement, sometimes laughing, sometimes weeping, touching
him, kissing his hair and his forehead, and gazing into his face with
hungry, eager eyes. The boy was very good-looking and dressed like a
gentleman's son. The heart of Anukul brimmed over with a sudden rush of
affection.

Nevertheless the magistrate in him asked: "Have you any proofs?"

Raicharan said: "How could there be any proof of such a deed? God alone
knows that I stole your boy, and no one else in the world."

When Anukul saw how eagerly his wife was clinging to the boy, he
realised the futility of asking for proofs. It would be wiser to
believe. And then,--where could an old man like Raicharan get such a boy
from? And why should his faithful servant deceive him for nothing?

"But," he added severely, "Raicharan, you must not stay here."

"Where shall I go, Master?" said Raicharan, in a choking voice, folding
his hands. "I am old. Who will take in an old man as a servant?"

The mistress said: "Let him stay. My child will be pleased. I forgive
him."

But Anukul's magisterial conscience would not allow him. "No," he said,
"he cannot be forgiven for what he has done."

Raicharan bowed to the ground and clasped Anukul's feet. "Master," he
cried, "let me stay. It was not I who did it. It was God."

Anukul's conscience was more shocked than ever when Raicharan tried to
put the blame on God's shoulders.

"No," he said, "I could not allow it. I cannot trust you any more. You
have done an act of treachery."

Raicharan rose to his feet and said: "It was not I who did it."

"Who was it then?" asked Anukul.

Raicharan replied: "It was my fate."

But no educated man could take this for an excuse. Anukul remained
obdurate.

When Phailna saw that he was the wealthy magistrate's son, and not
Raicharan's, he was angry at first, thinking that he had been cheated
all this time of his birthright. But seeing Raicharan in distress, he
generously said to his father: "Father, forgive him. Even if you don't
let him live with us, let him have a small monthly pension."

After hearing this, Raicharan did not utter another word. He looked for
the last time on the face of his son. He made obeisance to his old
master and mistress. Then he went out and was mingled with the
numberless people of the world.

At the end of the month Anukul sent him some money to his village. But
the money came back. There was no one there of the name of Raicharan.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =judicial.= From the Latin word "judex," a judge. Compare
      _judicious_, _judge_, _judgment_, _just_.

  =compensate.= From the Latin word "pensare," to weigh. Compare
      _dispense_, _dispensary_, _compensation_. (This must not be
      confused with the Latin word "pendere," to hang. Compare
      _suspend_, _expend_, _depend_.)

  =ecstasy.= From two Greek words "ex" and "stasis," meaning standing
      outside oneself.

  =transferred.= From the Latin word "ferre," to carry. Compare _offer_,
      _defer_, _confer_, _prefer_, _proffer_, _infer_, _conference_,
      _fertile_.

  =crumble.= To break into crumbs or little pieces.

  =promoted.= From the Latin word "movAe"re," to move. Compare _motive_,
      _motion_, _motor_, _promotion_, _commotion_.

  =excited.= From the Latin word "ciere," to set in motion. Compare
      _incite_, _excitement_, _exciting_, _cite_.

  =lantern.= A French word derived from the Greek "lampein," to shine.
      Compare, _magic-lantern_, _lamp_.

  =gipsy.= Also spelt gypsy, from "Egyptian"; because the gipsies were
      supposed to come from Egypt.

  =usurper.= From the Latin word "usurpare." This word is made up of
      "usus," use and "rapere," to snatch. Compare _use_, _usual_,
      _usufruct_, _rapid_, _rapt_, _rapture_.

  =magisterial.= From the Latin word "magister," a judge. Compare
      _magistrate_, _magistracy_.

  =obdurate.= From the Latin word "dA"rus," hard. Compare _endure_,
      _endurance_, _obduracy_.




MASTER MASHAI




V

MASTER MASHAI


I

Adhar Babu lives upon the interest of the capital left him by his
father. Only the brokers, negotiating loans, come to his drawing room
and smoke the silver-chased hookah, and the clerks from the attorney's
office discuss the terms of some mortgage or the amount of the stamp
fees. He is so careful with his money that even the most dogged efforts
of the boys from the local football club fail to make any impression on
his pocket.

At the time this story opens a new guest came into his household. After
a long period of despair, his wife, Nanibala, bore him a son.

The child resembled his mother,--large eyes, well-formed nose, and fair
complexion. Ratikanta, Adharlal's protA(C)gA(C), gave verdict,--"He is worthy
of this noble house." They named him Venugopal.

Never before had Adharlal's wife expressed any opinion differing from
her husband's on household expenses. There had been a hot discussion now
and then about the propriety of some necessary item and up to this time
she had merely acknowledged defeat with silent contempt. But now
Adharlal could no longer maintain his supremacy. He had to give way
little by little when things for his son were in question.


II

As Venugopal grew up, his father gradually became accustomed to spending
money on him. He obtained an old teacher, who had a considerable repute
for his learning and also for his success in dragging impassable boys
through their examinations. But such a training does not lead to the
cultivation of amiability. This man tried his best to win the boy's
heart, but the little that was left in him of the natural milk of human
kindness had turned sour, and the child repulsed his advances from the
very beginning. The mother, in consequence, objected to him strongly,
and complained that the very sight of him made her boy ill. So the
teacher left.

Just then, Haralal made his appearance with a dirty dress and a torn
pair of old canvas shoes. Haralal's mother, who was a widow, had kept
him with great difficulty at a District school out of the scanty
earnings which she made by cooking in strange houses and husking rice.
He managed to pass the Matriculation and determined to go to College. As
a result of his half-starved condition, his pinched face tapered to a
point in an unnatural manner,--like Cape Comorin in the map of India;
and the only broad portion of it was his forehead, which resembled the
ranges of the Himalayas.

The servant asked Haralal what he wanted, and he answered timidly that
he wished to see the master.

The servant answered sharply: "You can't see him." Haralal was
hesitating, at a loss what to do next, when Venugopal, who had finished
his game in the garden, suddenly came to the door. The servant shouted
at Haralal: "Get away." Quite unaccountably Venugopal grew excited and
cried: "No, he shan't get away." And he dragged the stranger to his
father.

Adharlal had just risen from his mid-day sleep and was sitting quietly
on the upper verandah in his cane chair, rocking his legs. Ratikanta was
enjoying his hookah, seated in a chair next to him. He asked Haralal how
far he had got in his reading. The young man bent his head and answered
that he had passed the Matriculation. Ratikanta looked stern and
expressed surprise that he should be so backward for his age. Haralal
kept silence. It was Ratikanta's special pleasure to torture his
patron's dependants, whether actual or potential.

Suddenly it struck Adharlal that he would be able to employ this youth
as a tutor for his son on next to nothing. He agreed, there and then, to
take him at a salary of five rupees a month with board and lodging free.


III

This time the post of tutor remained occupied longer than before. From
the very beginning of their acquaintance Haralal and his pupil became
great friends. Never before did Haralal have such an opportunity of
loving any young human creature. His mother had been so poor and
dependent, that he had never had the privilege of playing with the
children where she was employed at work. He had not hitherto suspected
the hidden stores of love which lay all the while accumulating in his
own heart.

Venu, also, was glad to find a companion in Haralal. He was the only boy
in the house. His two younger sisters were looked down upon, as unworthy
of being his playmates. So his new tutor became his only companion,
patiently bearing the undivided weight of the tyranny of his child
friend.


IV

Venu was now eleven. Haralal had passed his Intermediate, winning a
scholarship. He was working hard for his B.A. degree. After College
lectures were over, he would take Venu out into the public park and tell
him stories about the heroes from Greek History and Victor Hugo's
romances. The child used to get quite impatient to run to Haralal, after
school hours, in spite of his mother's attempts to keep him by her side.

This displeased Nanibala. She thought that it was a deep-laid plot of
Haralal's to captivate her boy, in order to prolong his own appointment.
One day she talked to him from behind the purdah: "It is your duty to
teach my son only for an hour or two in the morning and evening. But why
are you always with him? The child has nearly forgotten his own parents.
You must understand that a man of your position is no fit companion for
a boy belonging to this house."

Haralal's voice choked a little as he answered that for the future he
would merely be Venu's teacher and would keep away from him at other
times.

It was Haralal's usual practice to begin his College study early before
dawn. The child would come to him directly after he had washed himself.
There was a small pool in the garden and they used to feed the fish in
it with puffed rice. Venu was also engaged in building a miniature
garden-house, at the corner of the garden, with its liliputian gates and
hedges and gravel paths. When the sun became too hot they would go back
into the house, and Venu would have his morning lesson from Haralal.

On the day in question Venu had risen earlier than usual, because he
wished to hear the end of the story which Haralal had begun the evening
before. But he found his teacher absent. When asked about him, the
door-servant said that he had gone out. At lesson time Venu remained
unnaturally quiet. He never even asked Haralal why he had gone out, but
went on mechanically with his lessons. When the child was with his
mother taking his breakfast, she asked him what had happened to make him
so gloomy, and why he was not eating his food. Venu gave no answer.
After his meal his mother caressed him and questioned him repeatedly.
Venu burst out crying and said,--"Master Mashai." His mother asked
Venu,--"What about Master Mashai?" But Venu found it difficult to name
the offence which his teacher had committed.

His mother said to Venu: "Has your Master Mashai been saying anything to
you against _me_?"

Venu could not understand the question and went away.


V

There was a theft in Adhar Babu's house. The police were called in to
investigate. Even Haralal's trunks were searched. Ratikanta said with
meaning: "The man who steals anything, does not keep his thefts in his
own box."

Adharlal called his son's tutor and said to him: "It will not be
convenient for me to keep any of you in my own house. From to-day you
will have to take up your quarters outside, only coming in to teach my
son at the proper time."

Ratikanta said sagely, drawing at his hookah: "That is a good
proposal,--good for both parties."

Haralal did not utter a word, but he sent a letter saying that it would
be no longer possible for him to remain as tutor to Venu.

When Venu came back from school, he found his tutor's room empty. Even
that broken steel trunk of his was absent. The rope was stretched across
the corner, but there were no clothes or towel hanging on it. Only on
the table, which formerly was strewn with books and papers, stood a bowl
containing some gold-fish with a label on which was written the word
"Venu" in Haralal's hand-writing. The boy ran up at once to his father
and asked him what had happened. His father told him that Haralal had
resigned his post. Venu went to his room and flung himself down and
began to cry. Adharlal did not know what to do with him.

The next day, when Haralal was sitting on his wooden bedstead in the
Hostel, debating with himself whether he should attend his college
lectures, suddenly he saw Adhar Babu's servant coming into his room
followed by Venu. Venu at once ran up to him and threw his arms round
his neck asking him to come back to the house.

Haralal could not explain why it was absolutely impossible for him to go
back, but the memory of those clinging arms and that pathetic request
used to choke his breath with emotion long after.


VI

Haralal found out, after this, that his mind was in an unsettled state,
and that he had but a small chance of winning the scholarship, even if
he could pass the examination. At the same time, he knew that, without
the scholarship, he could not continue his studies. So he tried to get
employment in some office.

Fortunately for him, an English Manager of a big merchant firm took a
fancy to him at first sight. After only a brief exchange of words the
Manager asked him if he had any experience, and could he bring any
testimonial. Haralal could only answer "No"; nevertheless a post was
offered him of twenty rupees a month and fifteen rupees were allowed him
in advance to help him to come properly dressed to the office.

The Manager made Haralal work extremely hard. He had to stay on after
office hours and sometimes go to his master's house late in the evening.
But, in this way, he learnt his work quicker than others, and his fellow
clerks became jealous of him and tried to injure him, but without
effect. He rented a small house in a narrow lane and brought his mother
to live with him as soon as his salary was raised to forty rupees a
month. Thus happiness came back to his mother after weary years of
waiting.

Haralal's mother used to express a desire to see Venugopal, of whom she
had heard so much. She wished to prepare some dishes with her own hand
and to ask him to come just once to dine with her son. Haralal avoided
the subject by saying that his house was not big enough to invite him
for that purpose.


VII

The news reached Haralal that Venu's mother had died. He could not wait
a moment, but went at once to Adharlal's house to see Venu. After that
they began to see each other frequently.

But times had changed. Venu, stroking his budding moustache, had grown
quite a young man of fashion. Friends, befitting his present condition,
were numerous. That old dilapidated study chair and ink-stained desk had
vanished, and the room now seemed to be bursting with pride at its new
acquisitions,--its looking-glasses, oleographs, and other furniture.
Venu had entered college, but showed no haste in crossing the boundary
of the Intermediate examination.

Haralal remembered his mother's request to invite Venu to dinner. After
great hesitation, he did so. Venugopal, with his handsome face, at once
won the mother's heart. But as soon as ever the meal was over he became
impatient to go, and looking at his gold watch he explained that he had
pressing engagements elsewhere. Then he jumped into his carriage, which
was waiting at the door, and drove away. Haralal with a sigh said to
himself that he would never invite him again.


VIII

One day, on returning from office, Haralal noticed the presence of a man
in the dark room on the ground floor of his house. Possibly he would
have passed him by, had not the heavy scent of some foreign perfume
attracted his attention. Haralal asked who was there, and the answer
came:

"It is I, Master Mashai."

"What is the matter, Venu?" said Haralal. "When did you arrive?"

"I came hours ago," said Venu. "I did not know that you returned so
late."

They went upstairs together and Haralal lighted the lamp and asked Venu
whether all was well. Venu replied that his college classes were
becoming a fearful bore, and his father did not realize how dreadfully
hard it was for him to go on in the same class, year after year, with
students much younger than himself. Haralal asked him what he wished to
do. Venu then told him that he wanted to go to England and become a
barrister. He gave an instance of a student, much less advanced than
himself, who was getting ready to go. Haralal asked him if he had
received his father's permission. Venu replied that his father would not
hear a word of it until he had passed the Intermediate, and that was an
impossibility in his present frame of mind. Haralal suggested that he
himself should go and try to talk over his father.

"No," said Venu, "I can never allow that!"

Haralal asked Venu to stay for dinner and while they were waiting he
gently placed his hand on Venu's shoulder and said:

"Venu, you should not quarrel with your father, or leave home."

Venu jumped up angrily and said that if he was not welcome, he could go
elsewhere. Haralal caught him by the hand and implored him not to go
away without taking his food. But Venu snatched away his hand and was
just leaving the room when Haralal's mother brought the food in on a
tray. On seeing Venu about to leave she pressed him to remain and he did
so with bad grace.

While he was eating the sound of a carriage stopping at the door was
heard. First a servant entered the room with creaking shoes and then
Adhar Babu himself. Venu's face became pale. The mother left the room as
soon as she saw strangers enter. Adhar Babu called out to Haralal in a
voice thick with anger:

"Ratikanta gave me full warning, but I could not believe that you had
such devilish cunning hidden in you. So, you think you're going to live
upon Venu? This is sheer kidnapping, and I shall prosecute you in the
Police Court."

Venu silently followed his father and went out of the house.


IX

The firm to which Haralal belonged began to buy up large quantities of
rice and dhal from the country districts. To pay for this, Haralal had
to take the cash every Saturday morning by the early train and disburse
it. There were special centres where the brokers and middlemen would
come with their receipts and accounts for settlement. Some discussion
had taken place in the office about Haralal being entrusted with this
work, without any security, but the Manager undertook all the
responsibility and said that a security was not needed. This special
work used to go on from the middle of December to the middle of April.
Haralal would get back from it very late at night.

One day, after his return, he was told by his mother that Venu had
called and that she had persuaded him to take his dinner at their house.
This happened more than once. The mother said that it was because Venu
missed his own mother, and the tears came into her eyes as she spoke
about it.

One day Venu waited for Haralal to return and had a long talk with him.

"Master Mashai!" he said. "Father has become so cantankerous of late
that I cannot live with him any longer. And, besides, I know that he is
getting ready to marry again. Ratikanta is seeking a suitable match, and
they are always conspiring about it. There used to be a time when my
father would get anxious, if I were absent from home even for a few
hours. Now, if I am away for more than a week, he takes no
notice,--indeed he is greatly relieved. If this marriage takes place, I
feel that I cannot live in the house any longer. You must show me a way
out of this. I want to become independent."

Haralal felt deeply pained, but he did not know how to help his former
pupil. Venu said that he was determined to go to England and become a
barrister. Somehow or other he must get the passage money out of his
father: he could borrow it on a note of hand and his father would have
to pay when the creditors filed a suit. With this borrowed money he
would get away, and when he was in England his father was certain to
remit his expenses.

"But who is there," Haralal asked, "who would advance you the money?"

"You!" said Venu.

"I!" exclaimed Haralal in amazement.

"Yes," said Venu, "I've seen the servant bringing heaps of money here in
bags."

"The servant and the money belong to someone else."

Haralal explained why the money came to his house at night, like birds
to their nest, to be scattered next morning.

"But can't the Manager advance the sum?" Venu asked.

"He may do so," said Haralal, "if your father stands security."

The discussion ended at this point.


X

One Friday night a carriage and pair stopped before Haralal's lodging
house. When Venu was announced Haralal was counting money in his
bedroom, seated on the floor. Venu entered the room dressed in a strange
manner. He had discarded his Bengali dress and was wearing a Parsee coat
and trousers and had a cap on his head. Rings were prominent on almost
all the fingers of both hands, and a thick gold chain was hanging round
his neck: there was a gold-watch in his pocket, and diamond studs could
be seen peeping from his shirt sleeves. Haralal at once asked him what
was the matter and why he was wearing that dress.

"My father's marriage," said Venu, "comes off to-morrow. He tried hard
to keep it from me, but I found it out. I asked him to allow me to go to
our garden-house at Barrackpur for a few days, and he was only too glad
to get rid of me so easily. I am going there, and I wish to God I had
never to come back."

Haralal looked pointedly at the rings on his fingers. Venu explained
that they had belonged to his mother. Haralal then asked him if he had
already had his dinner. He answered, "Yes, haven't you had yours?"

"No," said Haralal, "I cannot leave this room until I have all the money
safely locked up in this iron chest."

"Go and take your dinner," said Venu, "while I keep guard here: your
mother will be waiting for you."

For a moment Haralal hesitated, and then he went out and had his dinner.
In a short time he came back with his mother and the three of them sat
among the bags of money talking together. When it was about midnight,
Venu took out his watch and looked at it and jumped up saying that he
would miss his train. Then he asked Haralal to keep all his rings and
his watch and chain until he asked for them again. Haralal put them all
together in a leather bag and laid it in the iron safe. Venu went out.

The canvas bags containing the currency notes had already been placed in
the safe: only the loose coins remained to be counted over and put away
with the rest.


XI

Haralal lay down on the floor of the same room, with the key under his
pillow, and went to sleep. He dreamt that Venu's mother was loudly
reproaching him from behind the curtain. Her words were indistinct, but
rays of different colours from the jewels on her body kept piercing the
curtain like needles and violently vibrating. Haralal struggled to call
Venu, but his voice seemed to forsake him. At last, with a noise, the
curtain fell down. Haralal started up from his sleep and found darkness
piled up round about him. A sudden gust of wind had flung open the
window and put out the light. Haralal's whole body was wet with
perspiration. He relighted the lamp and saw, by the clock, that it was
four in the morning. There was no time to sleep again; for he had to get
ready to start.

After Haralal had washed his face and hands his mother called from her
own room,--"Baba, why are you up so soon?"

It was the habit of Haralal to see his mother's face the first thing in
the morning in order to bring a blessing upon the day. His mother said
to him: "I was dreaming that you were going out to bring back a bride
for yourself." Haralal went to his own bedroom and began to take out the
bags containing the silver and the currency notes.

Suddenly his heart stopped beating. Three of the bags appeared to be
empty. He knocked them against the iron safe, but this only proved his
fear to be true. He opened them and shook them with all his might. Two
letters from Venu dropped out from one of the bags. One was addressed to
his father and one to Haralal.

Haralal tore open his own letter and began reading. The words seemed to
run into one another. He trimmed the lamp, but felt as if he could not
understand what he read. Yet the purport of the letter was clear. Venu
had taken three thousand rupees, in currency notes, and had started for
England. The steamer was to sail before day-break that very morning. The
letter ended with the words: "I am explaining everything in a letter to
my father. He will pay off the debt; and then, again, my mother's
ornaments, which I have left in your care, will more than cover the
amount I have taken."

Haralal locked up his room and hired a carriage and went with all haste
to the jetty. But he did not know even the name of the steamer which
Venu had taken. He ran the whole length of the wharves from Prinsep's
Ghat to Metiaburuj. He found that two steamers had started on their
voyage to England early that morning. It was impossible for him to know
which of them carried Venu, or how to reach him.

When Haralal got home, the sun was strong and the whole of Calcutta was
awake. Everything before his eyes seemed blurred. He felt as if he were
pushing against a fearful obstacle which was bodiless and without pity.
His mother came on the verandah to ask him anxiously where he had gone.
With a dry laugh he said to her,--"To bring home a bride for myself,"
and then he fainted away.

On opening his eyes after a while, Haralal asked his mother to leave
him. Entering his room he shut the door from the inside while his mother
remained seated on the floor of the verandah in the fierce glare of the
sun. She kept calling to him fitfully, almost mechanically,--"Baba,
Baba!"

The servant came from the Manager's office and knocked at the door,
saying that they would miss the train if they did not start out at once.
Haralal called from inside, "It will not be possible for me to start
this morning."

"Then where are we to go, Sir?"

"I will tell you later on."

The servant went downstairs with a gesture of impatience.

Suddenly Haralal thought of the ornaments which Venu had left behind. Up
till now he had completely forgotten about them, but with the thought
came instant relief. He took the leather bag containing them, and also
Venu's letter to his father, and left the house.

Before he reached Adharlal's house he could hear the bands playing for
the wedding, yet on entering he could feel that there had been some
disturbance. Haralal was told that there had been a theft the night
before and one or two servants were suspected. Adhar Babu was sitting in
the upper verandah flushed with anger and Ratikanta was smoking his
hookah. Haralal said to Adhar Babu, "I have something private to tell
you." Adharlal flared up, "I have no time now!" He was afraid that
Haralal had come to borrow money or to ask his help. Ratikanta suggested
that if there was any delicacy in making the request in his presence he
would leave the place. Adharlal told him angrily to sit where he was.
Then Haralal handed over the bag which Venu had left behind. Adharlal
asked what was inside it and Haralal opened it and gave the contents
into his hands.

Then Adhar Babu said with a sneer: "It's a paying business that you two
have started--you and your former pupil! You were certain that the
stolen property would be traced, and so you come along with it to me to
claim a reward!"

Haralal presented the letter which Venu had written to his father. This
only made Adharlal all the more furious.

"What's all this?" he shouted, "I'll call for the police! My son has not
yet come of age,--and _you_ have smuggled him out of the country! I'll
bet my soul you've lent him a few hundred rupees, and then taken a note
of hand for three thousand! But I am not going to be bound by _this_!"

"I never advanced him any money at all," said Haralal.

"Then how did he find it?" said Adharlal, "Do you mean to tell me he
broke open your safe and stole it?"

Haralal stood silent.

Ratikanta sarcastically remarked: "I don't believe this fellow ever set
hands on as much as three thousand rupees in his life."

When Haralal left the house he seemed to have lost the power of dreading
anything, or even of being anxious. His mind seemed to refuse to work.
Directly he entered the lane he saw a carriage waiting before his own
lodging. For a moment he felt certain that it was Venu's. It was
impossible to believe that his calamity could be so hopelessly final.

Haralal went up quickly, but found an English assistant from the firm
sitting inside the carriage. The man came out when he saw Haralal and
took him by the hand and asked him: "Why didn't you go out by train this
morning?" The servant had told the Manager his suspicions and he had
sent this man to find out.

Haralal answered: "Notes to the amount of three thousand rupees are
missing."

The man asked how that could have happened.

Haralal remained silent.

The man said to Haralal: "Let us go upstairs together and see where you
keep your money." They went up to the room and counted the money and
made a thorough search of the house.

When the mother saw this she could not contain herself any longer. She
came out before the stranger and said: "Baba, what has happened?" He
answered in broken Hindustani that some money had been stolen.

"Stolen!" the mother cried, "Why! How could it be stolen? Who could do
such a dastardly thing?" Haralal said to her: "Mother, don't say a
word."

The man collected the remainder of the money and told Haralal to come
with him to the Manager. The mother barred the way and said:

"Sir, where are you taking my son? I have brought him up, starving and
straining to do honest work. My son would never touch money belonging to
others."

The Englishman, not knowing Bengali, said, "Achcha! Achcha!" Haralal
told his mother not to be anxious; he would explain it all to the
Manager and soon be back again. The mother entreated him, with a
distressed voice,

"Baba, you haven't taken a morsel of food all morning." Haralal stepped
into the carriage and drove away, and the mother sank to the ground in
the anguish of her heart.

The Manager said to Haralal: "Tell me the truth. What did happen?"

Haralal said to him, "I haven't taken any money."

"I fully believe it," said the Manager, "but surely you know who has
taken it."

Haralal looked on the ground and remained silent.

"Somebody," said the Manager, "must have taken it away with your
connivance."

"Nobody," replied Haralal, "could take it away with my knowledge without
taking first my life."

"Look here, Haralal," said the Manager, "I trusted you completely. I
took no security. I employed you in a post of great responsibility.
Every one in the office was against me for doing so. The three thousand
rupees is a small matter, but the shame of all this to me is a great
matter. I will do one thing. I will give you the whole day to bring back
this money. If you do so, I shall say nothing about it and I will keep
you on in your post."

It was now eleven o'clock. Haralal with bent head went out of the
office. The clerks began to discuss the affair with exultation.

"What can I _do_? What can I _do_?" Haralal repeated to himself, as he
walked along like one dazed, the sun's heat pouring down upon him. At
last his mind ceased to think at all about what could be done, but the
mechanical walk went on without ceasing.

This city of Calcutta, which offered its shelter to thousands and
thousands of men had become like a steel trap. He could see no way out.
The whole body of people were conspiring to surround and hold him
captive--this most insignificant of men, whom no one knew. Nobody had
any special grudge against him, yet everybody was his enemy. The crowd
passed by, brushing against him: the clerks of the offices were eating
their lunch on the road side from their plates made of leaves: a tired
wayfarer on the Maidan, under the shade of a tree, was lying with one
hand beneath his head and one leg upraised over the other: The
up-country women, crowded into hackney carriages, were wending their way
to the temple: a chuprassie came up with a letter and asked him the
address on the envelope,--so the afternoon went by.

Then came the time when the offices were all about to close. Carriages
started off in all directions, carrying people back to their homes. The
clerks, packed tightly on the seats of the trams, looked at the theatre
advertisements as they returned to their lodgings. From to-day, Haralal
had neither his work in the office, nor release from work in the
evening. He had no need to hurry to catch the tram to take him to his
home. All the busy occupations of the city--the buildings--the horses
and carriages--the incessant traffic--seemed, now at one time, to swell
into dreadful reality, and at another time, to subside into the shadowy
unreal.

Haralal had taken neither food, nor rest, nor shelter all that day.

The street lamps were lighted from one road to another and it seemed to
him that a watchful darkness, like some demon, was keeping its eyes wide
open to guard every movement of its victim. Haralal did not even have
the energy to enquire how late it was. The veins on his forehead
throbbed, and he felt as if his head would burst. Through the paroxysms
of pain, which alternated with the apathy of dejection, only one thought
came again and again to his mind; among the innumerable multitudes in
that vast city, only one name found its way through his dry
throat,--"Mother!"

He said to himself, "At the deep of night, when no one is awake to
capture me--me, who am the least of all men,--I will silently creep to
my mother's arms and fall asleep, and may I never wake again!"

Haralal's one trouble was lest some police officer should molest him in
the presence of his mother, and this kept him back from going home. When
it became impossible for him at last to bear the weight of his own body,
he hailed a carriage. The driver asked him where he wanted to go. He
said: "Nowhere, I want to drive across the Maidan to get the fresh air."
The man at first did not believe him and was about to drive on, when
Haralal put a rupee into his hand as an advance payment. Thereupon the
driver crossed, and then re-crossed, the Maidan from one side to the
other, traversing the different roads.

Haralal laid his throbbing head on the side of the open window of the
carriage and closed his eyes. Slowly all the pain abated. His body
became cool. A deep and intense peace filled his heart and a supreme
deliverance seemed to embrace him on every side. It was _not_ true,--the
day's despair which threatened him with its grip of utter helplessness.
It was _not_ true, it was false. He knew now that it was only an empty
fear of the mind. Deliverance was in the infinite sky and there was no
end to peace. No king or emperor in the world had the power to keep
captive this nonentity, this Haralal. In the sky, surrounding his
emancipated heart on every side, he felt the presence of his mother,
that one poor woman. She seemed to grow and grow till she filled the
infinity of darkness. All the roads and buildings and shops of Calcutta
gradually became enveloped by her. In her presence vanished all the
aching pains and thoughts and consciousness of Haralal. It burst,--that
bubble filled with the hot vapour of pain. And now there was neither
darkness nor light, but only one tense fulness.

The Cathedral clock struck one. The driver called out impatiently:
"Babu, my horse can't go on any longer. Where do you want to go?"

There came no answer.

The driver came down and shook Haralal and asked him again where he
wanted to go.

There came no answer.

And the answer was never received from Haralal, where he wanted to go.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =broker.= This word meant originally a "broacher," one who broached
      or made a hole in casks of wine to test their value for sale.
      Then it came to mean a middleman in a sale.

  =attorney.= This word comes from the Old French "tourner" meaning to
      turn. The original sense of the word is "one who turns or
      transfers (property)," and thus it comes to mean one who is
      appointed to do legal business in the name of another. Compare the
      phrase "_power of attorney_."

  =mortgage.= This comes from the two words "mort-" meaning "death" and
      "gage" meaning "pledge,"--a death pledge. It is used for the
      transfer of property as a pledge or guarantee that the debt will
      be paid. Compare _mortuary_, _mortal_, _mortify_, _mortmain_; also
      compare _engage_, _disengage_, _wage_, _wager_.

  =repulsed.= From the Latin "puls-" meaning "to drive." This Latin root
      has another form "pel," also meaning "to drive." We have thus two
      series of  words:--

          _repel_, _impel_, _compel_, _expel_, _dispel_, and
          _repulse_, _impulse_ (noun), _compulsion_, _expulsion_.

  =amiability.= This word comes from the Latin "amicus" friend and is
      the same in origin as "amicability." Compare _amicable_ and
      _amiable_.

  =salary.= This originally meant "_salt_-money" from the Latin "sal"
      meaning "salt." First, it meant the "salt-money" given to
      soldiers, then it meant a fixed pay. Compare the use of _namak_ in
      India,--_namak khAenAe_,--which is somewhat similar.

  =liliputian.= This word has come into the English language from a
      famous story book called "Gulliver's Travels." "Liliput" was a
      place where tiny people lived and "Brobdingnag" was a place where
      giants lived. These two words are therefore sometimes used, in an
      amusing manner, to represent respectively the land of dwarfs and
      the land of giants.

  =B.A. degree.= These titles were originally used in the old medieval
      universities of Europe. The word "bachelor" was taken from its use
      in chivalry, where it meant a young knight not yet fully qualified
      or equipped. Then came the "Master," or fully qualified person. A
      secondary meaning of bachelor, which is now the most common, is
      "an unmarried person,"--a man not being considered fully qualified
      or equipped till he is married.

  =romance.= This word has a very interesting history. The Latin
      language was the literary language of the South of Europe for many
      centuries and the vernacular languages were despised. The word for
      "vernacular" was "romanicus" as contrasted with "Latinus," i.e.
      Latin. The old folk stories of the Middle Ages were written in the
      vernacular or "romance" languages, and as these stories were
      strange and mysterious, the word romance became used for this kind
      of literature.

  =pathetic.= From the Greek word "pathos" meaning "suffering." Compare
      _pathos_, _sympathy_, _pathology_, _electropathy_, _allopathy_,
      _homA"opathy_.

  =dilapidated.= From the Latin "lapis" meaning a "stone." It probably
      means to separate stone from stone. Compare _lapidary_,
      _dilapidation_.

  =intermediate.= From the Latin "medius" meaning "middle." Compare
      _mediate_, _immediate_, _medium_, _mediocrity_, _mediator._

  =police.= From the Greek "polis" meaning a "city." Compare _politics_,
      _policy_, _metropolis_, _politician_.

  =barrister.= From the word "bar." There was a bar in the law court,
      from which the lawyer pleaded his case. So the pleader was called
      a _bar_-ister. Compare the phrase _"called to the Bar."_

  =obstacle.= From the Latin root "sta-" meaning to stand. Compare
      _obstinate_, _station_, _status_, _statute_, _instant_,
      _distance_, _constant_.

  =dastardly.= A word of doubtful origin,--probably akin to the word
      "dazed."

  =reality.= From the Latin word "res" meaning a "thing." Compare
      _real_, _unreal_, _realize_, _republic_, _really_, _realization_.

  =alternated.= From the Latin "alter" meaning "other." Compare
      _alteration_, _alternative_, _alter_, _altercate_.

  =infinity.= From the Latin "finis" meaning "end." Compare _finish_,
      _finite_, _definite_, _confine_.




SUBHA




VI

SUBHA


When the girl was given the name of Subhashini, who could have guessed
that she would prove dumb? Her two elder sisters were Sukeshini and
Suhasini, and for the sake of uniformity her father named his youngest
girl Subhashini. She was called Subha for short.

Her two elder sisters had been married with the usual cost and
difficulty, and now the youngest daughter lay like a silent weight upon
the heart of her parents. All the world seemed to think that, because
she did not speak, therefore she did not feel; it discussed her future
and its own anxiety freely in her presence. She had understood from her
earliest childhood that God had sent her like a curse to her father's
house, so she withdrew herself from ordinary people and tried to live
apart. If only they would all forget her she felt she could endure it.
But who can forget pain? Night and day her parents' minds were aching on
her account. Especially her mother looked upon her as a deformity in
herself. To a mother a daughter is a more closely intimate part of
herself than a son can be; and a fault in her is a source of personal
shame. Banikantha, Subha's father, loved her rather better than his
other daughters; her mother regarded her with aversion as a stain upon
her own body.

If Subha lacked speech, she did not lack a pair of large dark eyes,
shaded with long lashes; and her lips trembled like a leaf in response
to any thought that rose in her mind.

When we express our thought in words, the medium is not found easily.
There must be a process of translation, which is often inexact, and then
we fall into error. But black eyes need no translating; the mind itself
throws a shadow upon them. In them thought opens or shuts, shines forth
or goes out in darkness, hangs steadfast like the setting moon or like
the swift and restless lightning illumines all quarters of the sky. They
who from birth have had no other speech than the trembling of their lips
learn a language of the eyes, endless in expression, deep as the sea,
clear as the heavens, wherein play dawn and sunset, light and shadow.
The dumb have a lonely grandeur like Nature's own. Wherefore the other
children almost dreaded Subha and never played with her. She was silent
and companionless as noontide.

The hamlet where she lived was Chandipur. Its river, small for a river
of Bengal, kept to its narrow bounds like a daughter of the middle
class. This busy streak of water never overflowed its banks, but went
about its duties as though it were a member of every family in the
villages beside it. On either side were houses and banks shaded with
trees. So stepping from her queenly throne, the river-goddess became a
garden deity of each home, and forgetful of herself performed her task
of endless benediction with swift and cheerful foot.

Banikantha's house looked out upon the stream. Every hut and stack in
the place could be seen by the passing boatmen. I know not if amid these
signs of worldly wealth any one noticed the little girl who, when her
work was done, stole away to the waterside and sat there. But here
Nature fulfilled her want of speech and spoke for her. The murmur of the
brook, the voice of the village folk, the songs of the boatmen, the
crying of the birds and rustle of trees mingled and were one with the
trembling of her heart. They became one vast wave of sound which beat
upon her restless soul. This murmur and movement of Nature were the dumb
girl's language; that speech of the dark eyes, which the long lashes
shaded, was the language of the world about her. From the trees, where
the cicalas chirped, to the quiet stars there was nothing but signs and
gestures, weeping and sighing. And in the deep mid-noon, when the
boatmen and fisher-folk had gone to their dinner, when the villagers
slept and birds were still, when the ferry-boats were idle, when the
great busy world paused in its toil and became suddenly a lonely, awful
giant, then beneath the vast impressive heavens there were only dumb
Nature and a dumb girl, sitting very silent,--one under the spreading
sunlight, the other where a small tree cast its shadow.

But Subha was not altogether without friends. In the stall were two
cows, Sarbbashi and Panguli. They had never heard their names from her
lips, but they knew her footfall. Though she had no words, she murmured
lovingly and they understood her gentle murmuring better than all
speech. When she fondled them or scolded or coaxed them, they understood
her better than men could do. Subha would come to the shed and throw her
arms round Sarbbashi's neck; she would rub her cheek against her
friend's, and Panguli would turn her great kind eyes and lick her face.
The girl paid them three regular visits every day and others that were
irregular. Whenever she heard any words that hurt her, she would come to
these dumb friends out of due time. It was as though they guessed her
anguish of spirit from her quiet look of sadness. Coming close to her,
they would rub their horns softly against her arms, and in dumb, puzzled
fashion try to comfort her. Besides these two, there were goats and a
kitten; but Subha had not the same equality of friendship with them,
though they showed the same attachment. Every time it got a chance,
night or day, the kitten would jump into her lap, and settle down to
slumber, and show its appreciation of an aid to sleep as Subha drew her
soft fingers over its neck and back.

Subha had a comrade also among the higher animals, and it is hard to say
what were the girl's relations with him; for he could speak, and his
gift of speech left them without any common language. He was the
youngest boy of the Gosains, Pratap by name, an idle fellow. After long
effort, his parents had abandoned the hope that he would ever make his
living. Now losels have this advantage, that, though their own folk
disapprove of them, they are generally popular with every one else.
Having no work to chain them, they become public property. Just as every
town needs an open space where all may breathe, so a village needs two
or three gentlemen of leisure, who can give time to all; then, if we are
lazy and want a companion, one is to hand.

Pratap's chief ambition was to catch fish. He managed to waste a lot of
time this way, and might be seen almost any afternoon so employed. It
was thus most often that he met Subha. Whatever he was about, he liked a
companion; and, when one is catching fish, a silent companion is best of
all. Pratap respected Subha for her taciturnity, and, as every one
called her Subha, he showed his affection by calling her Su. Subha used
to sit beneath a tamarind, and Pratap, a little distance off, would cast
his line. Pratap took with him a small allowance of betel, and Subha
prepared it for him. And I think that, sitting and gazing a long while,
she desired ardently to bring some great help to Pratap, to be of real
aid, to prove by any means that she was not a useless burden to the
world. But there was nothing to do. Then she turned to the Creator in
prayer for some rare power, that by an astonishing miracle she might
startle Pratap into exclaiming: "My! I never dreamt our Su could have
done this!"

Only think, if Subha had been a water nymph, she might have risen slowly
from the river, bringing the gem of a snake's crown to the
landing-place. Then Pratap, leaving his paltry fishing, might dive into
the lower world, and see there, on a golden bed in a palace of silver,
whom else but dumb little Su, Banikantha's child? Yes, our Su, the only
daughter of the king of that shining city of jewels! But that might not
be, it was impossible. Not that anything is really impossible, but Su
had been born, not into the royal house of Patalpur, but into
Banikantha's family, and she knew no means of astonishing the Gosains'
boy.

Gradually she grew up. Gradually she began to find herself. A new
inexpressible consciousness like a tide from the central places of the
sea, when the moon is full, swept through her. She saw herself,
questioned herself, but no answer came that she could understand.

Once upon a time, late on a night of full moon, she slowly opened her
door and peeped out timidly. Nature, herself at full moon, like lonely
Subha, was looking down on the sleeping earth. Her strong young life
beat within her; joy and sadness filled her being to its brim; she
reached the limits even of her own illimitable loneliness, nay, passed
beyond them. Her heart was heavy, and she could not speak. At the skirts
of this silent troubled Mother there stood a silent troubled girl.

The thought of her marriage filled her parents with an anxious care.
People blamed them, and even talked of making them outcasts. Banikantha
was well off; they had fish-curry twice daily; and consequently he did
not lack enemies. Then the women interfered, and Bani went away for a
few days. Presently he returned and said: "We must go to Calcutta."

They got ready to go to this strange country. Subha's heart was heavy
with tears, like a mist-wrapt dawn. With a vague fear that had been
gathering for days, she dogged her father and mother like a dumb animal.
With her large eyes wide open, she scanned their faces as though she
wished to learn something. But not a word did they vouchsafe. One
afternoon in the midst of all this, as Pratap was fishing, he laughed:
"So then, Su, they have caught your bridegroom, and you are going to be
married! Mind you don't forget me altogether!" Then he turned his mind
again to his fish. As a stricken doe looks in the hunter's face, asking
in silent agony: "What have I done to you?" so Subha looked at Pratap.
That day she sat no longer beneath her tree. Banikantha, having finished
his nap, was smoking in his bedroom when Subha dropped down at his feet
and burst out weeping as she gazed towards him. Banikantha tried to
comfort her, and his cheek grew wet with tears.

It was settled that on the morrow they should go to Calcutta. Subha went
to the cow-shed to bid farewell to her childhood's comrades. She fed
them with her hand; she clasped their necks; she looked into their
faces, and tears fell fast from the eyes which spoke for her. That night
was the tenth of the moon. Subha left her room, and flung herself down
on her grassy couch beside her dear river. It was as if she threw her
arms about Earth, her strong silent mother, and tried to say: "Do not
let me leave you, mother. Put your arms about me, as I have put mine
about you, and hold me fast."

One day in a house in Calcutta, Subha's mother dressed her up with great
care. She imprisoned her hair, knotting it up in laces, she hung her
about with ornaments, and did her best to kill her natural beauty.
Subha's eyes filled with tears. Her mother, fearing they would grow
swollen with weeping, scolded her harshly, but the tears disregarded the
scolding. The bridegroom came with a friend to inspect the bride. Her
parents were dizzy with anxiety and fear when they saw the god arrive to
select the beast for his sacrifice. Behind the stage, the mother called
her instructions aloud, and increased her daughter's weeping twofold,
before she sent her into the examiner's presence. The great man, after
scanning her a long time, observed: "Not so bad."

He took special note of her tears, and thought she must have a tender
heart. He put it to her credit in the account, arguing that the heart,
which to-day was distressed at leaving her parents, would presently
prove a useful possession. Like the oyster's pearls, the child's tears
only increased her value, and he made no other comment.

The almanac was consulted, and the marriage took place on an auspicious
day. Having delivered over their dumb girl into another's hands, Subha's
parents returned home. Thank God! Their caste in this and their safety
in the next world were assured! The bridegroom's work lay in the west,
and shortly after the marriage he took his wife thither.

In less than ten days every one knew that the bride was dumb! At least,
if any one did not, it was not her fault, for she deceived no one. Her
eyes told them everything, though no one understood her. She looked on
every hand, she found no speech, she missed the faces, familiar from
birth, of those who had understood a dumb girl's language. In her silent
heart there sounded an endless, voiceless weeping, which only the
Searcher of Hearts could hear.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =uniformity.= From the Latin "unus," meaning "one" and "forma"
      meaning "form." Compare _universe_, _unison_, _unite_,
      _formalism_, _formation_, _reform_, _deformed_, _deformity_ (the
      last word occurs in the next paragraph of the story).

  =translation.= The Latin word meaning "to bring" has two roots, viz.
      "fer" and "lat." This word is taken from the second root. We have
      the two parallel series of words in English:

          transfer, refer, confer, differ, etc.
          translate, relate, collate, dilate, etc.

  =puzzled.= This is one of the few words in the English language whose
      origin is doubtful. It probably comes from the word to "pose"
      (which itself is a shortened form of "oppose") meaning to set
      forward a difficult problem.

  =losels.= An uncommon English word meaning a person who is good for
      nothing. The word is derived from the verb to "lose."

  =taciturnity.= The Latin word "tacitus," means "quiet" or "silent."
      Compare _tacit_, _tacitly_, _reticence_, _reticent_.

  =My!= This is used by common people in England. It is probably the
      short form of "My eye!"

  =dogged.= The word in this sense means to follow like a dog; to follow
      closely. From this we have the adjective "dogged" pronounced as
      two syllables dog-gA(C)d, meaning persevering, persistent, never
      giving in, e.g. doggA(C)d courage.

  =disregarded.= From the French "garder" or "guarder," meaning "to
      keep." This French word appears in many English forms. Compare
      _reward_, _guard_, _guerdon_, _guardian_, _ward_, _warder_,
      _regard_.

  =dizzy.= This word comes from an old Saxon root, which has left many
      words in modern English. Compare _daze_, _dazed_, _dazzle_,
      _doze_, _drowse_, _drowsy_.

  =deceived.= From the Latin word "capere," meaning to take. The English
      verbs such as "receive," "conceive," "perceive" have come into
      English from the French. The Latin root is more clearly seen in
      the nouns such as "deception," "reception," "perception," etc. It
      should be carefully noticed that these "French" forms are spelt
      _eive_ instead of _ieve_. A simple rule is this, that after _c_
      write _ei_ not _ie_, but after other consonants write _ie_.
      Compare the spelling of _believe_, _grieve_, _relieve_ with that
      of _receive_, _deceive_.




THE POSTMASTER




VII

THE POSTMASTER


The postmaster first took up his duties in the village of Ulapur. Though
the village was a small one, there was an indigo factory near by, and
the proprietor, an Englishman, had managed to get a post office
established.

Our postmaster belonged to Calcutta. He felt like a fish out of water in
this remote village. His office and living-room were in a dark thatched
shed, not far from a green, slimy pond, surrounded on all sides by a
dense growth.

The men employed in the indigo factory had no leisure; moreover, they
were hardly desirable companions for decent folk. Nor is a Calcutta boy
an adept in the art of associating with others. Among strangers he
appears either proud or ill at ease. At any rate, the postmaster had but
little company; nor had he much to do.

At times he tried his hand at writing a verse or two. That the movement
of the leaves and the clouds of the sky were enough to fill life with
joy--such were the sentiments to which he sought to give expression.
But God knows that the poor fellow would have felt it as the gift of a
new life, if some genie of the _Arabian Nights_ had in one night swept
away the trees, leaves and all, and replaced them with a macadamised
road, hiding the clouds from view with rows of tall houses.

The postmaster's salary was small. He had to cook his own meals, which
he used to share with Ratan, an orphan girl of the village, who did odd
jobs for him.

When in the evening the smoke began to curl up from the village
cowsheds, and the cicalas chirped in every bush; when the mendicants of
the BaA1/4l sect sang their shrill songs in their daily meeting-place, when
any poet, who had attempted to watch the movement of the leaves in the
dense bamboo thickets, would have felt a ghostly shiver run down his
back, the postmaster would light his little lamp, and call out "Ratan."

Ratan would sit outside waiting for this call, and, instead of coming in
at once, would reply, "Did you call me, sir?"

"What are you doing?" the postmaster would ask.

"I must be going to light the kitchen fire," would be the answer.

And the postmaster would say: "Oh, let the kitchen fire be for awhile;
light me my pipe first."

At last Ratan would enter, with puffed-out cheeks, vigorously blowing
into a flame a live coal to light the tobacco. This would give the
postmaster an opportunity of conversing. "Well, Ratan," perhaps he would
begin, "do you remember anything of your mother?" That was a fertile
subject. Ratan partly remembered, and partly didn't. Her father had been
fonder of her than her mother; him she recollected more vividly. He used
to come home in the evening after his work, and one or two evenings
stood out more clearly than others, like pictures in her memory. Ratan
would sit on the floor near the postmaster's feet, as memories crowded
in upon her. She called to mind a little brother that she had--and how
on some bygone cloudy day she had played at fishing with him on the edge
of the pond, with a twig for a make-believe fishing-rod. Such little
incidents would drive out greater events from her mind. Thus, as they
talked, it would often get very late, and the postmaster would feel too
lazy to do any cooking at all. Ratan would then hastily light the fire,
and toast some unleavened bread, which, with the cold remnants of the
morning meal, was enough for their supper.

On some evenings, seated at his desk in the corner of the big empty
shed, the postmaster too would call up memories of his own home, of his
mother and his sister, of those for whom in his exile his heart was
sad,--memories which were always haunting him, but which he could not
talk about with the men of the factory, though he found himself
naturally recalling them aloud in the presence of the simple little
girl. And so it came about that the girl would allude to his people as
mother, brother, and sister, as if she had known them all her life. In
fact, she had a complete picture of each one of them painted in her
little heart.

One noon, during a break in the rains, there was a cool soft breeze
blowing; the smell of the damp grass and leaves in the hot sun felt like
the warm breathing of the tired earth on one's body. A persistent bird
went on all the afternoon repeating the burden of its one complaint in
Nature's audience chamber.

The postmaster had nothing to do. The shimmer of the freshly washed
leaves, and the banked-up remnants of the retreating rain-clouds were
sights to see; and the postmaster was watching them and thinking to
himself: "Oh, if only some kindred soul were near--just one loving human
being whom I could hold near my heart!" This was exactly, he went on to
think, what that bird was trying to say, and it was the same feeling
which the murmuring leaves were striving to express. But no one knows,
or would believe, that such an idea might also take possession of an
ill-paid village postmaster in the deep, silent mid-day interval of his
work.

The postmaster sighed, and called out "Ratan." Ratan was then sprawling
beneath the guava-tree, busily engaged in eating unripe guavas. At the
voice of her master, she ran up breathlessly, saying: "Were you calling
me, Dada?" "I was thinking," said the postmaster, "of teaching you to
read." And then for the rest of the afternoon he taught her the
alphabet.

Thus, in a very short time, Ratan had got as far as the double
consonants.

It seemed as though the showers of the season would never end. Canals,
ditches, and hollows were all overflowing with water. Day and night the
patter of rain was heard, and the croaking of frogs. The village roads
became impassable, and marketing had to be done in punts.

One heavily clouded morning, the postmaster's little pupil had been long
waiting outside the door for her call, but, not hearing it as usual, she
took up her dog-eared book, and slowly entered the room. She found her
master stretched out on his bed, and, thinking that he was resting, she
was about to retire on tip-toe, when she suddenly heard her
name--"Ratan!" She turned at once and asked: "Were you sleeping, Dada?"
The postmaster in a plaintive voice said: "I am not well. Feel my head;
is it very hot?"

In the loneliness of his exile, and in the gloom of the rains, his
ailing body needed a little tender nursing. He longed to remember the
touch on the forehead of soft hands with tinkling bracelets, to imagine
the presence of loving womanhood, the nearness of mother and sister. And
the exile was not disappointed. Ratan ceased to be a little girl. She at
once stepped into the post of mother, called in the village doctor, gave
the patient his pills at the proper intervals, sat up all night by his
pillow, cooked his gruel for him, and every now and then asked: "Are you
feeling a little better, Dada?"

It was some time before the postmaster, with weakened body, was able to
leave his sick-bed. "No more of this," said he with decision. "I must
get a transfer." He at once wrote off to Calcutta an application for a
transfer, on the ground of the unhealthiness of the place.

Relieved from her duties as nurse, Ratan again took up her old place
outside the door. But she no longer heard the same old call. She would
sometimes peep inside furtively to find the postmaster sitting on his
chair, or stretched on his bed, and staring absent-mindedly into the
air. While Ratan was awaiting her call, the postmaster was awaiting a
reply to his application. The girl read her old lessons over and over
again,--her great fear was lest, when the call came, she might be found
wanting in the double consonants. At last, after a week, the call did
come one evening. With an overflowing heart Ratan rushed into the room
with her--"Were you calling me, Dada?"

The postmaster said: "I am going away to-morrow, Ratan."

"Where are you going, Dada?"

"I am going home."

"When will you come back?"

"I am not coming back."

Ratan asked no other question. The postmaster, of his own accord, went
on to tell her that his application for a transfer had been rejected, so
he had resigned his post and was going home.

For a long time neither of them spoke another word. The lamp went on
dimly burning, and from a leak in one corner of the thatch water dripped
steadily into an earthen vessel on the floor beneath it.

After a while Ratan rose, and went off to the kitchen to prepare the
meal; but she was not so quick about it as on other days. Many new
things to think of had entered her little brain. When the postmaster had
finished his supper, the girl suddenly asked him: "Dada, will you take
me to your home?"

The postmaster laughed. "What an idea!" said he; but he did not think it
necessary to explain to the girl wherein lay the absurdity.

That whole night, in her waking and in her dreams, the postmaster's
laughing reply haunted her--"What an idea!"

On getting up in the morning, the postmaster found his bath ready. He
had stuck to his Calcutta habit of bathing in water drawn and kept in
pitchers, instead of taking a plunge in the river as was the custom of
the village. For some reason or other, the girl could not ask him about
the time of his departure, so she had fetched the water from the river
long before sunrise, that it should be ready as early as he might want
it. After the bath came a call for Ratan. She entered noiselessly, and
looked silently into her master's face for orders. The master said: "You
need not be anxious about my going away, Ratan; I shall tell my
successor to look after you." These words were kindly meant, no doubt:
but inscrutable are the ways of a woman's heart!

Ratan had borne many a scolding from her master without complaint, but
these kind words she could not bear. She burst out weeping, and said:
"No, no, you need not tell anybody anything at all about me; I don't
want to stay on here."

The postmaster was dumbfounded. He had never seen Ratan like this
before.

The new incumbent duly arrived, and the postmaster, having given over
charge, prepared to depart. Just before starting he called Ratan and
said: "Here is something for you; I hope it will keep you for some
little time." He brought out from his pocket the whole of his month's
salary, retaining only a trifle for his travelling expenses. Then Ratan
fell at his feet and cried: "Oh, Dada, I pray you, don't give me
anything, don't in any way trouble about me," and then she ran away out
of sight.

The postmaster heaved a sigh, took up his carpet bag, put his umbrella
over his shoulder, and, accompanied by a man carrying his many-coloured
tin trunk, he slowly made for the boat.

When he got in and the boat was under way, and the rain-swollen river,
like a stream of tears welling up from the earth, swirled and sobbed at
her bows, then he felt a pain at heart; the grief-stricken face of a
village girl seemed to represent for him the great unspoken pervading
grief of Mother Earth herself. At one time he had an impulse to go back,
and bring away along with him that lonesome waif, forsaken of the world.
But the wind had just filled the sails, the boat had got well into the
middle of the turbulent current, and already the village was left
behind, and its outlying burning-ground came in sight.

So the traveller, borne on the breast of the swift-flowing river,
consoled himself with philosophical reflections on the numberless
meetings and partings going on in the world--on death, the great
parting, from which none returns.

But Ratan had no philosophy. She was wandering about the post office in
a flood of tears. It may be that she had still a lurking hope in some
corner of her heart that her Dada would return, and that is why she
could not tear herself away. Alas for our foolish human nature! Its fond
mistakes are persistent. The dictates of reason take a long time to
assert their own sway. The surest proofs meanwhile are disbelieved.
False hope is clung to with all one's might and main, till a day comes
when it has sucked the heart dry and it forcibly breaks through its
bonds and departs. After that comes the misery of awakening, and then
once again the longing to get back into the maze of the same mistakes.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =indigo.= This word has a very interesting history. It means
      "Indian." The celebrated dark-blue dye came from India. This dye
      was first known to the Greeks who called it "Indikon," then to
      the Latins who called it Indicum, then to the Italians and
      Spaniards who called it Indigo. It was introduced into England
      from Italy by artists and painters who kept the Italian word
      "indigo" without change.

  =genie.= There is a Latin word "genius," meaning originally a spirit
      inhabiting a special place. It is from this word that our English
      common noun "genius" is taken, meaning a specially gifted or
      inspired person, e.g. "a man of genius." But in the Arabian Nights
      a completely different Arabic word is found, viz. "jinn" with its
      feminine form "jinni." This was written in English "genie" and was
      confused with the word "genius." The plural of genie when used in
      this sense is genii, which is really the plural of the Latin word
      genius.

  =macadamised.= This is quite a modern word in English. It comes from
      the name of the inventor of this kind of road-paving, who was Mr.
      J. L. Macadam. He discovered that different layers of small stone
      rolled in, one after the other, can stand the wear and tear of
      traffic. We have similar words from proper names. Compare,
      _boycott_, _burke_, _lynch_, etc.

  =allude.= From the Latin "ludere," to play. Compare _prelude_,
      _interlude_, _delude_, _collusion_, _elude_, _elusive_,
      _allusion_.

  =guava.= This word came into English from the Spanish. It is of great
      interest to trace the names of the fruits in English back to
      their sources, e.g. _currant_, comes from Corinth; _mango_ from
      the Portuguese _manga_ (from the Tamil "mankay" _fruit-tree_);
      _orange_ from the Arabic "narang" and Hindustani "narangi";
      _apricot_ from Arabic al-burquq; _date_ from the Greek "daktulos,"
      meaning "finger."

  =alphabet.= The two first letters in the Greek language are called
      "alpha" and "beta." Then the whole series of letters was named an
      alphabeta or alphabet.

  =consonants.= From the Latin "sonare," meaning to sound. Consonants
      are letters which "sound with" the vowels. Compare _dissonant_,
      _assonance_, _sonant_, _sonorous_, _sonata_.

  =canal.= This is one example of a word taken into English from the
      Latin, through the French, having a companion word in English. The
      companion word in this case is _channel_. Compare _cavalry_ and
      _chivalry_, _legal_ and _loyal_, _guard_ and _ward_.

  =dumbfounded.= This word has come into the English language from
      common speech. It is a mixture of the English word dumb, and the
      Latin "fundere," "to pour" which we find in _confound_,
      _profound_, _confusion_. It is not often that we get such hybrid
      words in earlier English, though to-day they are becoming common
      in the case of new words such as _motorcar_, _speedometer_,
      _airplane_, _waterplane_, _automobile_, etc. The old rule used to
      be that a compound word in English should have _both_ its parts
      from the same language (e.g. both parts Latin, or Greek, or Saxon,
      etc.). But this rule is rapidly breaking down in common practice
      as new words rush into the English language to express all the new
      discoveries of science. We have English and Greek roots mixed
      (such as _airplane_), and Latin and Greek roots mixed (such as
      _oleograph_).




THE CASTAWAY




VIII

THE CASTAWAY


Towards evening the storm was at its height. From the terrific downpour
of rain, the crash of thunder, and the repeated flashes of lightning,
you might think that a battle of the gods and demons was raging in the
skies. Black clouds waved like the Flags of Doom. The Ganges was lashed
into a fury, and the trees of the gardens on either bank swayed from
side to side with sighs and groans.

In a closed room of one of the riverside houses at Chandernagore, a
husband and his wife were seated on a bed spread on the floor, intently
discussing. An earthen lamp burned beside them.

The husband, Sharat, was saying: "I wish you would stay on a few days
more; you would then be able to return home quite strong again."

The wife, Kiran, was saying: "I have quite recovered already. It will
not, cannot possibly, do me any harm to go home now."

Every married person will at once understand that the conversation was
not quite so brief as I have reported it. The matter was not difficult,
but the arguments for and against did not advance it towards a solution.
Like a rudderless boat, the discussion kept turning round and round the
same point; and at last threatened to be overwhelmed in a flood of
tears.

Sharat said: "The doctor thinks you should stop here a few days longer."

Kiran replied: "Your doctor knows everything!"

"Well," said Sharat, "you know that just now all sorts of illnesses are
abroad. You would do well to stop here a month or two more."

"And at this moment I suppose every one in this place is perfectly
well!"

What had happened was this: Kiran was a universal favourite with her
family and neighbours, so that, when she fell seriously ill, they were
all anxious. The village wiseacres thought it shameless for her husband
to make so much fuss about a mere wife and even to suggest a change of
air, and asked if Sharat supposed that no woman had ever been ill
before, or whether he had found out that the folk of the place to which
he meant to take her were immortal. Did he imagine that the writ of Fate
did not run there? But Sharat and his mother turned a deaf ear to them,
thinking that the little life of their darling was of greater
importance than the united wisdom of a village. People are wont to
reason thus when danger threatens their loved ones. So Sharat went to
Chandernagore, and Kiran recovered, though she was still very weak.
There was a pinched look on her face which filled the beholder with
pity, and made his heart tremble, as he thought how narrowly she had
escaped death.

Kiran was fond of society and amusement; the loneliness of her riverside
villa did not suit her at all. There was nothing to do, there were no
interesting neighbours, and she hated to be busy all day with medicine
and dieting. There was no fun in measuring doses and making
fomentations. Such was the subject discussed in their closed room on
this stormy evening.

So long as Kiran deigned to argue, there was a chance of a fair fight.
When she ceased to reply, and with a toss of her head disconsolately
looked the other way, the poor man was disarmed. He was on the point of
surrendering unconditionally when a servant shouted a message through
the shut door.

Sharat got up and on opening the door learnt that a boat had been upset
in the storm, and that one of the occupants, a young Brahmin boy, had
succeeded in swimming ashore at their garden.

Kiran was at once her own sweet self and set to work to get out some dry
clothes for the boy. She then warmed a cup of milk and invited him to
her room.

The boy had long curly hair, big expressive eyes, and no sign yet of
hair on the face. Kiran, after getting him to drink some milk asked him
all about himself.

He told her that his name was Nilkanta, and that he belonged to a
theatrical troupe. They were coming to play in a neighbouring villa when
the boat had suddenly foundered in the storm. He had no idea what had
become of his companions. He was a good swimmer and had just managed to
reach the shore.

The boy stayed with them. His narrow escape from a terrible death made
Kiran take a warm interest in him. Sharat thought the boy's appearance
at this moment rather a good thing, as his wife would now have something
to amuse her, and might be persuaded to stay on for some time longer.
Her mother-in-law, too, was pleased at the prospect of profiting their
Brahmin guest by her kindness. And Nilkanta himself was delighted at his
double escape from his master and from the other world, as well as at
finding a home in this wealthy family.

But in a short while Sharat and his mother changed their opinion, and
longed for his departure. The boy found a secret pleasure in smoking
Sharat's hookahs; he would calmly go off in pouring rain with Sharat's
best silk umbrella for a stroll through the village, and make friends
with all whom he met. Moreover, he had got hold of a mongrel village dog
which he petted so recklessly that it came indoors with muddy paws, and
left tokens of its visit on Sharat's spotless bed. Then he gathered
about him a devoted band of boys of all sorts and sizes, and the result
was that not a solitary mango in the neighbourhood had a chance of
ripening that season.

There is no doubt that Kiran had a hand in spoiling the boy. Sharat
often warned her about it, but she would not listen to him. She made a
dandy of him with Sharat's cast-off clothes, and gave him new ones also.
And because she felt drawn towards him, and had a curiosity to know more
about him, she was constantly calling him to her own room. After her
bath and midday meal Kiran would be seated on the bedstead with her
betel-leaf box by her side; and while her maid combed and dried her
hair, Nilkanta would stand in front and recite pieces out of his
repertory with appropriate gesture and song, his elf-locks waving
wildly. Thus the long afternoon hours passed merrily away. Kiran would
often try to persuade Sharat to sit with her as one of the audience,
but Sharat, who had taken a cordial dislike to the boy, refused; nor
could Nilkanta do his part half so well when Sharat was there. His
mother would sometimes be lured by the hope of hearing sacred names in
the recitation; but love of her mid-day sleep speedily overcame
devotion, and she lay lapped in dreams.

The boy often got his ears boxed and pulled by Sharat, but as this was
nothing to what he had been used to as a member of the troupe, he did
not mind it in the least. In his short experience of the world he had
come to the conclusion that, as the earth consisted of land and water,
so human life was made up of eatings and beatings, and that the beatings
largely predominated.

It was hard to tell Nilkanta's age. If it was about fourteen or fifteen,
then his face was too old for his years; if seventeen or eighteen, then
it was too young. He was either a man too early or a boy too late. The
fact was that, joining the theatrical band when very young, he had
played the parts of Radhika, Damayanti, and Sita, and a thoughtful
Providence so arranged things that he grew to the exact stature that his
manager required, and then growth ceased.

Since every one saw how small Nilkanta was, and he himself felt small,
he did not receive due respect for his years. Causes, natural and
artificial, combined to make him sometimes seem immature for seventeen
years, and at other times a mere lad of fourteen but far too knowing
even for seventeen. And as no sign of hair appeared on his face, the
confusion became greater. Either because he smoked or because he used
language beyond his years, his lips puckered into lines that showed him
to be old and hard; but innocence and youth shone in his large eyes. I
fancy that his heart remained young, but the hot glare of publicity had
been a forcing-house that ripened untimely his outward aspect.

In the quiet shelter of Sharat's house and garden at Chandernagore,
Nature had leisure to work her way unimpeded. Nilkanta had lingered in a
kind of unnatural youth, but now he silently and swiftly overpassed that
stage. His seventeen or eighteen years came to adequate revelation. No
one observed the change, and its first sign was this, that when Kiran
treated him like a boy, he felt ashamed. When the gay Kiran one day
proposed that he should play the part of lady's companion, the idea of
woman's dress hurt him, though he could not say why. So now, when she
called for him to act over again his old characters, he disappeared.

It never occurred to Nilkanta that he was even now not much more than a
lad-of-all-work in a strolling company. He even made up his mind to pick
up a little education from Sharat's factor. But, because he was the pet
of his master's wife, the factor could not endure the sight of him.
Also, his restless training made it impossible for him to keep his mind
long engaged; sooner or later, the alphabet did a misty dance before his
eyes. He would sit long enough with an open book on his lap, leaning
against a _champak_ bush beside the Ganges. The waves sighed below,
boats floated past, birds flitted and twittered restlessly above. What
thoughts passed through his mind as he looked down on that book he alone
knew, if indeed he did know. He never advanced from one word to another,
but the glorious thought, that he was actually reading a book, filled
his soul with exultation. Whenever a boat went by, he lifted his book,
and pretended to be reading hard, shouting at the top of his voice. But
his energy dropped as soon as the audience was gone.

Formerly he sang his songs automatically, but now their tunes stirred in
his mind. Their words were of little import and full of trifling
alliteration. Even the feeble meaning they had was beyond his
comprehension; yet when he sang--

    Twice-born bird, ah! wherefore stirred
      To wrong our royal lady?
    Goose, ah, say why wilt thou slay
      Her in forest shady?

then he felt as if transported to another world and to fear other folk.
This familiar earth and his own poor life became music, and he was
transformed. That tale of the goose and the king's daughter flung upon
the mirror of his mind a picture of surpassing beauty. It is impossible
to say what he imagined himself to be, but the destitute little slave of
the theatrical troupe faded from his memory.

When with evening the child of want lies down, dirty and hungry, in his
squalid home, and hears of prince and princess and fabled gold, then in
the dark hovel with its dim flickering candle, his mind springs free
from its bonds of poverty and misery and walks in fresh beauty and
glowing raiment, strong beyond all fear of hindrance, through that fairy
realm where all is possible.

Even so, this drudge of wandering players fashioned himself and his
world anew, as he moved in spirit amid his songs. The lapping water,
rustling leaves, and calling birds; the goddess who had given shelter to
him, the helpless, the God-forsaken; her gracious, lovely face, her
exquisite arms with their shining bangles, her rosy feet as soft as
flower-petals; all these by some magic became one with the music of his
song. When the singing ended, the mirage faded, and the Nilkanta of the
stage appeared again, with his wild elf-locks. Fresh from the complaints
of his neighbour, the owner of the despoiled mango-orchard, Sharat would
come and box his ears and cuff him. The boy Nilkanta, the misleader of
adoring youths, went forth once more, to make ever new mischief by land
and water and in the branches that are above the earth.

Shortly after the advent of Nilkanta, Sharat's younger brother, Satish,
came to spend his college vacation with them. Kiran was hugely pleased
at finding a fresh occupation. She and Satish were of the same age, and
the time passed pleasantly in games and quarrels and reconciliations and
laughter and even tears. Suddenly she would clasp him over the eyes from
behind with vermilion-stained hands, or she would write "monkey" on his
back, or else she would bolt the door on him from the outside amidst
peals of laughter. Satish in his turn did not take things lying down; he
would steal her keys and rings; he would put pepper among her betel, he
would tie her to the bed when she was not looking.

Meanwhile, heaven only knows what possessed poor Nilkanta. He was
suddenly filled with a bitterness which he must avenge on somebody or
something. He thrashed his devoted boy-followers for no fault, and sent
them away crying. He would kick his pet mongrel till it made the skies
resound with its whinings. When he went out for a walk, he would litter
his path with twigs and leaves beaten from the roadside shrubs with his
cane.

Kiran liked to see people enjoying good fare. Nilkanta had an immense
capacity for eating, and never refused a good thing however often it was
offered. So Kiran liked to send for him to have his meals in her
presence, and ply him with delicacies, happy in the bliss of seeing this
Brahmin boy eat to satiety. After Satish's arrival she had much less
spare time on her hands, and was seldom present when Nilkanta's meals
were served. Before, her absence made no difference to the boy's
appetite, and he would not rise till he had drained his cup of milk and
rinsed it thoroughly with water.

But now, if Kiran was not present to ask him to try this and that, he
was miserable, and nothing tasted right. He would get up, without eating
much, and say to the serving-maid in a choking voice: "I am not hungry."
He thought in imagination that the news of his repeated refusal, "I am
not hungry," would reach Kiran; he pictured her concern, and hoped that
she would send for him, and press him to eat. But nothing of the sort
happened. Kiran never knew and never sent for him; and the maid finished
whatever he left. He would then put out the lamp in his room, and throw
himself on his bed in the darkness, burying his head in the pillow in a
paroxysm of sobs. What was his grievance? Against whom? And from whom
did he expect redress? At last, when no one else came, Mother Sleep
soothed with her soft caresses the wounded heart of the motherless lad.

Nilkanta came to the unshakable conviction that Satish was poisoning
Kiran's mind against him. If Kiran was absent-minded, and had not her
usual smile, he would jump to the conclusion that some trick of Satish
had made her angry with him. He took to praying to the gods, with all
the fervour of his hate, to make him at the next rebirth Satish, and
Satish him. He had an idea that a Brahmin's wrath could never be in
vain; and the more he tried to consume Satish with the fire of his
curses, the more did his own heart burn within him. And upstairs he
would hear Satish laughing and joking with his sister-in-law.

Nilkanta never dared openly to show his enmity to Satish. But he would
contrive a hundred petty ways of causing him annoyance. When Satish
went for a swim in the river, and left his soap on the steps of the
bathing-place, on coming back for it he would find that it had
disappeared. Once he found his favourite striped tunic floating past him
on the water, and thought it had been blown away by the wind.

One day Kiran, desiring to entertain Satish, sent for Nilkanta to recite
as usual, but he stood there in gloomy silence. Quite surprised, Kiran
asked him what was the matter. But he remained silent. And when again
pressed by her to repeat some particular favourite piece of hers, he
answered: "I don't remember," and walked away.

At last the time came for their return home. Everybody was busy packing
up. Satish was going with them. But to Nilkanta nobody said a word. The
question whether he was to go or not seemed to have occurred to nobody.

The subject, as a matter of fact, had been raised by Kiran, who had
proposed to take him along with them. But her husband and his mother and
brother had all objected so strenuously that she let the matter drop. A
couple of days before they were to start, she sent for the boy, and with
kind words advised him to go back to his own home.

So many days had he felt neglected that this touch of kindness was too
much for him; he burst into tears. Kiran's eyes were also brimming
over. She was filled with remorse at the thought that she had created a
tie of affection, which could not be permanent.

But Satish was much annoyed at the blubbering of this overgrown boy.
"Why does the fool stand there howling instead of speaking?" said he.
When Kiran scolded him for an unfeeling creature, he replied: "My dear
sister, you do not understand. You are too good and trustful. This
fellow turns up from the Lord knows where, and is treated like a king.
Naturally the tiger has no wish to become a mouse again. And he has
evidently discovered that there is nothing like a tear or two to soften
your heart."

Nilkanta hurriedly left the spot. He felt he would like to be a knife to
cut Satish to pieces; a needle to pierce him through and through; a fire
to burn him to ashes. But Satish was not even scared. It was only his
own heart that bled and bled.

Satish had brought with him from Calcutta a grand inkstand. The inkpot
was set in a mother-of-pearl boat drawn by a German-silver goose
supporting a penholder. It was a great favourite of his, and he cleaned
it carefully every day with an old silk handkerchief. Kiran would laugh,
and tapping the silver bird's beak would say--

    Twice-born bird, ah! wherefore stirred
      To wrong our royal lady?

and the usual war of words would break out between her and her
brother-in-law.

The day before they were to start, the inkstand was missing and could
nowhere be found. Kiran smiled, and said: "Brother-in-law, your goose
has flown off to look for your Damayanti."

But Satish was in a great rage. He was certain that Nilkanta had stolen
it--for several people said they had seen him prowling about the room
the night before. He had the accused brought before him. Kiran also was
there. "You have stolen my inkstand, you thief!" he blurted out. "Bring
it back at once." Nilkanta had always taken punishment from Sharat,
deserved or undeserved, with perfect equanimity. But, when he was called
a thief in Kiran's presence, his eyes blazed with a fierce anger, his
breast swelled, and his throat choked. If Satish had said another word,
he would have flown at him like a wild cat and used his nails like
claws.

Kiran was greatly distressed at the scene, and taking the boy into
another room said in her sweet, kind way: "Nilu, if you really have
taken that inkstand give it to me quietly, and I shall see that no one
says another word to you about it." Big tears coursed down the boy's
cheeks, till at last he hid his face in his hands, and wept bitterly.
Kiran came back from the room and said: "I am sure Nilkanta has not
taken the inkstand." Sharat and Satish were equally positive that no
other than Nilkanta could have done it.

But Kiran said determinedly: "Never."

Sharat wanted to cross-examine the boy, but his wife refused to allow
it.

Then Satish suggested that his room and box should be searched. And
Kiran said: "If you dare do such a thing I will never forgive you. You
shall not spy on the poor innocent boy." And as she spoke, her wonderful
eyes filled with tears. That settled the matter and effectually
prevented any further molestation of Nilkanta.

Kiran's heart overflowed with pity at this attempted outrage on a
homeless lad. She got two new suits of clothes and a pair of shoes, and
with these and a banknote in her hand she quietly went into Nilkanta's
room in the evening. She intended to put these parting presents into his
box as a surprise. The box itself had been her gift.

From her bunch of keys she selected one that fitted and noiselessly
opened the box. It was so jumbled up with odds and ends that the new
clothes would not go in. So she thought she had better take everything
out and pack the box for him. At first knives, tops, kite-flying reels,
bamboo twigs, polished shells for peeling green mangoes, bottoms of
broken tumblers and such like things dear to a boy's heart were
discovered. Then there came a layer of linen, clean and otherwise. And
from under the linen there emerged the missing inkstand, goose and all.

Kiran, with flushed face, sat down helplessly with the inkstand in her
hand, puzzled and wondering.

In the meantime, Nilkanta had come into the room from behind without
Kiran knowing it. He had seen the whole thing and thought that Kiran had
come like a thief to catch him in his thieving,--and that his deed was
out. How could he ever hope to convince her that he was not a thief, and
that only revenge had prompted him to take the inkstand, which he meant
to throw into the river at the first chance? In a weak moment he had put
it in the box instead. "He was not a thief," his heart cried out, "not a
thief!" Then what was he? What could he say? That he had stolen, and yet
he was not a thief? He could never explain to Kiran how grievously wrong
she was. And then, how could he bear the thought that she had tried to
spy on him?

At last Kiran with a deep sigh replaced the inkstand in the box, and, as
if she were the thief herself, covered it up with the linen and the
trinkets as they were before; and at the top she placed the presents,
together with the banknote which she had brought for him.

The next day the boy was nowhere to be found. The villagers had not seen
him; the police could discover no trace of him. Said Sharat: "Now, as a
matter of curiosity, let us have a look at his box." But Kiran was
obstinate in her refusal to allow that to be done.

She had the box brought up to her own room; and taking out the inkstand
alone, she threw it into the river.

The whole family went home. In a day the garden became desolate. And
only that starving mongrel of Nilkanta's remained prowling along the
river-bank, whining and whining as if its heart would break.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =favourite.= A certain number of words such as _honour_, _colour_,
      _favour_, _ardour_, _fervour_ have come into English through the
      French from the Latin. There is a constant tendency to-day in
      modern English to leave out the letter "u" and spell _color_,
      _favor_, etc. But this movement has not yet gained much ground in
      England.

  =wiseacres.= This form originally comes from the Dutch. The ending
      "acres" is a corruption of the Dutch "seggen" which is the same as
      the English to say. The word is equivalent to "wise-sayers."

  =deign.= This is a word which comes through the French from the Latin
      "dignus," meaning worthy. Compare _indignant_, _dignitary_,
      _condign_, _indignity_.

  =troupe.= An example of two words, with slightly different meanings,
      coming from one and the same French word. The French word is
      "troupe," meaning a company. This form is used in English for a
      company of players or actors. But the form "troop" is used chiefly
      of soldiers.

  =automatically.= This is a modern English word from the Greek "autos,"
      meaning self. Compare _autobiography_, _autonomy_, _autocracy_.
      Modern English is drawing largely from the Greek language for its
      new words.

  =alliteration.= The Latin word for letter is "littera." From this we
      get many English words, e.g. _letter_, _literate_, _literal_,
      _literature_, _illiterate_, _obliterate_, _transliterate_, etc.

  =mirage.= From the Latin "mirari," to wonder. Compare _mirror_,
      _miracle_, _admire_. This is one of the words in English which
      keeps the old French accent on the last syllable--mirAige. The
      tendency in English is always to throw the accent back as far as
      possible. Many words have changed their pronunciation in the
      course of time. Obdurate, in Milton's time, was pronounced
      obdAšrate, but to-day it is pronounced A cubedbdurate. Trafalgar was
      pronounced TrafalgAir last century. Now we pronounce it TrafAilgar.




THE SON OF RASHMANI




IX

THE SON OF RASHMANI


I

Kalipada's mother was Rashmani, but she had to do the duty of the father
as well, because when both of the parents are "mother" then it is bad
for the child. Bhavani, her husband, was wholly incapable of keeping his
children under discipline. To know why he was bent on spoiling his son,
you must hear something of the former history of the family.

Bhavani was born in the famous house of Saniari. His father, Abhaya
Charan, had a son, Shyama Charan, by his first wife. When he married
again after her death he had himself passed the marriageable age, and
his new father-in-law took advantage of the weakness of his position to
have a special portion of his estate settled on his daughter. In this
way he was satisfied that proper provision had been made, if his
daughter should become a widow early in life. She would be independent
of the charity of Shyama Charan.

The first part of his anticipation came true. For very soon after the
birth of a son, whom she called Bhavani, Abhaya Charan died. It gave the
father-in-law great peace and consolation, as he looked forward to his
own death, to know that his daughter was properly looked after.

Shyama Charan was quite grown up. In fact his own eldest boy was a year
older than Bhavani. He brought up the latter with his own son. In doing
this he never took a farthing from the property allotted to his
step-mother, and every year he got a receipt from her after submitting
detailed accounts. His honesty in this affair surprised the
neighbourhood. In fact they thought that such honesty was another name
for foolishness. They did not like the idea of a division being made in
the undivided ancestral property. If Shyama Charan in some underhand
manner had been able to annul the dowry, his neighbours would have
admired his sagacity; and there were good advisers ready to hand who
could have rendered him material aid in the attainment of such an
object. But Shyama Charan, in spite of the risk of crippling his
patrimony, strictly set aside the dowry which came to the share of his
step-mother; and the widow, Vraja Sundari, being naturally affectionate
and trustful, had every confidence in Shyama Charan whom she trusted as
her own son. More than once she had chided him for being so particular
about her portion of the property. She would tell him that, as she was
not going to take her property with her when she died, and as it would
in any case revert to the family, it was not necessary to be so very
strict about rendering accounts. But he never listened to her.

Shyama Charan was a severe disciplinarian by habit and his children were
perfectly aware of the fact. But Bhavani had every possible freedom, and
this gave rise to the impression that he was more partial to his
step-brother than to his own sons. But Bhavani's education was sadly
neglected and he completely relied on Shyama Charan for the management
of his share of the property. He merely had to sign documents
occasionally without ever spending a thought on their contents. On the
other hand, Tarapada, the eldest son of Shyama Charan, was quite an
expert in the management of the estate, having to act as an assistant to
his father.

After the death of Shyama Charan, Tarapada said to Bhavani, "Uncle, we
must not live together as we have done for so long, because some
trifling misunderstanding may come at any moment and cause utter
disruption."

Bhavani never imagined, even in his dream, that a day might come when he
would have to manage his own affairs. The world in which he had been
born and bred ever appeared to him complete and entire in itself. It was
an incomprehensible calamity to him that there could be a dividing line
somewhere and that this world of his could be split into two. When he
found that Tarapada was immovable and indifferent to the grief and
dishonour that such a step would bring to the family, he began to rack
his brain to find out how the property could be divided with the least
possible strain.

Tarapada showed surprise at his uncle's anxiety and said that there was
no need to trouble about this, because the division had already been
made in the life-time of his grandfather. Bhavani said in amazement,
"But I know nothing of this!" Tarapada said in answer, "Then you must be
the only one in the whole neighbourhood who does not. For, lest there
should be ruinous litigation after he had gone, my grandfather had
already given a portion of the property to your mother." Bhavani thought
this not unlikely and asked, "What about the house?" Tarapada said, "If
you wish, you can keep this house to yourself and we shall be contented
with the other house in the district town."

As Bhavani had never been to this town-house, he had neither knowledge
of it, nor affection for it. He was astounded at the magnanimity of
Tarapada for so easily relinquishing his right to the house in the
village where they had been brought up. But when Bhavani told everything
to his mother, she struck her forehead with her hand and said: "This is
preposterous! What I got from my husband was my own dowry and its income
is very small. I do not see why you should be deprived of your share in
your father's property."

Bhavani said, "Tarapada is quite positive that his grandfather never
gave us any thing except this land."

Vraja Sundari was astonished and informed her son that her husband had
made two copies of his will, one of which was still lying in her own
box. The box was opened and it was found that there was only the deed of
gift for the property belonging to the mother and nothing else. The copy
of the will had been taken out.

The help of advisers was sought. The man who came to their rescue was
Bagala, the son of their family _guru_. It was the profession of the
father to look after the spiritual needs of the village; the material
side was left to the son. The two of them had divided between themselves
the other world and this. Whatever might be the result for others, they
themselves had nothing to suffer from this division. Bagala said that,
even if the will was missing, the shares in the ancestral property must
be equal, as between the brothers.

Just at this time, a copy of a will made its appearance supporting the
claims of the other side. In this document there was no mention of
Bhavani and the whole property was given to the grandsons at the time
when no son was born to Bhavani. With Bagala as his captain Bhavani set
out on his voyage across the perilous sea of litigation. When his vessel
at last reached harbour his funds were nearly exhausted and the
ancestral property was in the hands of the other party. The land which
was given to his mother had dwindled to such an extent, that it could
barely give them shelter, or keep up the family dignity. Then Tarapada
went away to the district town and they never met again.


II

Shyama Charan's treachery pierced the heart of the widow like an
assassin's knife. To the end of her life, almost every day she would
heave a sigh and say that God would never suffer such an injustice to be
done. She was quite firm in her faith when she said to Bhavani, "I do
not know your law or your law courts, but I am certain that my husband's
true will and testament will someday be recovered. You will find it
again."

Because Bhavani was helpless in worldly matters such assurances as these
gave him great consolation. He settled down in his inactivity, certain
in his own mind that his pious mother's prophecy could never remain
unfulfilled. After his mother's death his faith became all the stronger,
since the memory of her piety acquired greater radiance through death's
mystery. He felt quite unconcerned about the stress of their poverty
which became more and more formidable as the years went by. The
necessities of life and the maintenance of family traditions,--these
seemed to him like play acting on a temporary stage, not real things.
When his former expensive clothing was outworn and he had to buy cheap
materials in the shop, this amused him almost like a joke. He smiled and
said to himself,--"These people do not know that this is only a passing
phase of my fortune. Their surprise will be all the greater, when some
day I shall celebrate the Puja Festival with unwonted magnificence."

This certainty of future prodigality was so clear to his mind's eye that
present penury escaped his attention. His servant, Noto, was the
principal companion with whom he had discussions about these things.
They used to have animated conversations, in which sometimes his opinion
differed from his master's, as to the propriety of bringing down a
theatrical troupe from Calcutta for these future occasions. Noto used to
get reprimands from Bhavani for his natural miserliness in these items
of future expenditure.

While Bhavani's one anxiety was about the absence of an heir, who could
inherit his vast possible wealth, a son was born to him. The horoscope
plainly indicated that the lost property would come back to this boy.

From the time of the birth of his son, Bhavani's attitude was changed.
It became cruelly difficult for him now to bear his poverty with his old
amused equanimity, because he felt that he had a duty towards this new
representative of the illustrious house of Saniari, who had such a
glorious future before him. That the traditional extravagance could not
be maintained on the occasion of the birth of his child gave him the
keenest sorrow. He felt as if he were cheating his own son. So he
compensated his boy with an inordinate amount of spoiling.

Bhavani's wife, Rashmani, had a different temperament from her husband.
She never felt any anxiety about the family traditions of the Chowdhuris
of Saniari. Bhavani was quite aware of the fact and indulgently smiled
to himself, as though nothing better could be expected from a woman who
came from a Vaishnava family of very humble lineage. Rashmani frankly
acknowledged that she could not share the family sentiments: what
concerned her most was the welfare of her own child.

There was hardly an acquaintance in the neighbourhood with whom Bhavani
did not discuss the question of the lost will; but he never spoke a word
about it to his wife. Once or twice he had tried, but her perfect
unconcern had made him drop the subject. She neither paid attention to
the past greatness of the family, nor to its future glories,--she kept
her mind busy with the actual necessities of the present, and those
necessities were not small in number or quality.

When the Goddess of Fortune deserts a house, she usually leaves some of
her burdens behind, and this ancient family was still encumbered with
its host of dependents, though its own shelter was nearly crumbling to
dust. These parasites take it to be an insult if they are asked to do
any service. They get head-aches at the least touch of the kitchen
smoke. They are visited with sudden rheumatism the moment they are asked
to run errands. Therefore all the responsibilities of maintaining the
family were laid upon Rashmani herself. Women lose their delicacy of
refinement, when they are compelled night and day to haggle with their
destiny over things which are pitifully small, and for this they are
blamed by those for whom they toil.

Besides her household affairs Rashmani had to keep all the accounts of
the little landed property which remained and also to make arrangements
for collecting rents. Never before was the estate managed with such
strictness. Bhavani had been quite incapable of collecting his dues:
Rashmani never made any remission of the least fraction of rent. The
tenants, and even her own agents, reviled her behind her back for the
meanness of the family from which she came. Even her husband
occasionally used to enter his protest against the harsh economy which
went against the grain of the world-famed house of Saniari.

Rashmani quite ungrudgingly took the blame of all this upon herself and
openly confessed the poverty of her parents. Tying the end of her _sari_
tightly round her waist she went on with her household duties in her own
vigorous fashion and made herself thoroughly disagreeable both to the
inmates of the house and to her neighbours. But nobody ever had the
courage to interfere. Only one thing she carefully avoided. She never
asked her husband to help her in any work and she was nervously afraid
of his taking up any responsibilities. Indeed she was always furiously
engaged in keeping her husband idle; and because he had received the
best possible training in this direction she was wholly successful in
her mission.

Rashmani had attained middle age before her son came. Up to this time
all the pent-up tenderness of the mother in her and all the love of the
wife had their centre of devotion in this simple-hearted
good-for-nothing husband. Bhavani was a child grown up by mistake beyond
its natural age. This was the reason why, after the death of her
husband's mother, she had to assume the position of mother and mistress
in one.

In order to protect her husband from invasions of Bagala, the son of the
_guru_, and other calamities, Rashmani adopted such a stern demeanour,
that the companions of her husband used to be terribly afraid of her.
She never had the opportunity, which a woman usually has, of keeping
her fierceness hidden and of softening the keen edge of her
words,--maintaining a dignified reserve towards men such as is proper
for a woman.

Bhavani meekly accepted his wife's authority with regard to himself, but
it became extremely hard for him to obey her when it related to
Kalipada, his son. The reason was, that Rashmani never regarded
Bhavani's son from the point of view of Bhavani himself. In her heart
she pitied her husband and said, "Poor man, it was no fault of his, but
his misfortune, to be born into a rich family." That is why she never
could expect her husband to be deprived of any comfort to which he had
been accustomed. Whatever might be the condition of the household
finance, she tried hard to keep him in his habitual ease and luxury.
Under her rA(C)gime all expense was strictly limited except in the case of
Bhavani. She would never allow him to notice if some inevitable gap
occurred in the preparation of his meals or his apparel. She would blame
some imaginary dog for spoiling dishes that were never made and would
blame herself for her carelessness. She would attack Noto for letting
some fictitious article of dress be stolen or lost. This had the usual
effect of rousing Bhavani's sympathy on behalf of his favourite servant
and he would take up his defence. Indeed it had often happened that
Bhavani had confessed with bare-faced shamelessness that he had used the
dress which had never been bought, and for whose loss Noto was blamed;
but what happened afterwards, he had not the power to invent and was
obliged to rely upon the fertile imagination of his wife who was also
the accuser!

Thus Rashmani treated her husband, but she never put her son in the same
category. For he was her own child and why should he be allowed to give
himself airs? Kalipada had to be content for his breakfast with a few
handfuls of puffed rice and some treacle. During the cold weather he had
to wrap his body as well as his head with a thick rough cotton
_chaddar_. She would call his teacher before her and warn him never to
spare her boy, if he was the least neglectful with his lessons. This
treatment of his own son was the hardest blow that Bhavani Charan
suffered since the days of his destitution. But as he had always
acknowledged defeat at the hands of the powerful, he had not the spirit
to stand up against his wife in her method of dealing with the boy.

The dress which Rashmani provided for her son, during the Puja
festivities, was made of such poor material that in former days the very
servants of the house would have rebelled if it had been offered to
them. But Rashmani more than once tried her best to explain to her
husband that Kalipada, being the most recent addition to the Chowdhuri
family, had never known their former splendour and so was quite glad to
get what was given to him. But this pathetic innocence of the boy about
his own destiny hurt Bhavani more than anything else, and he could not
forgive himself for deceiving the child. When Kalipada would dance for
joy and rush to him to show him some present from his mother, which was
ridiculously trivial, Bhavani's heart would suffer torture.

Bagala, the _guru's_ son, was now in an affluent condition owing to his
agency in the law suit which had brought about the ruin of Bhavani. With
the money which he had in hand he used to buy cheap tinsel wares from
Calcutta before the Puja holidays. Invisible ink,--absurd combinations
of stick, fishing-rod and umbrella,--letter-paper with pictures in the
corner,--silk fabrics bought at auctions, and other things of this kind,
attractive to the simple villagers,--these were his stock in trade. All
the forward young men of the village vied with one another in rising
above their rusticity by purchasing these sweepings of the Calcutta
market which, they were told, were absolutely necessary for the city
gentry.

Once Bagala had bought a wonderful toy,--a doll in the form of a foreign
woman,--which, when wound up, would rise from her chair and begin to fan
herself with sudden alacrity. Kalipada was fascinated by it. He had a
very good reason to avoid asking his mother about the toy; so he went
straight to his father and begged him to purchase it for him. Bhavani
answered "yes" at once, but when he heard the price his face fell.
Rashmani kept all the money and he went to her as a timid beggar. He
began with all sorts of irrelevant remarks and then took a desperate
plunge into the subject with startling incoherence.

Rashmani briefly remarked: "Are you mad?" Bhavani Charan sat silent
revolving in his mind what to say next.

"Look here," he exclaimed, "I don't think I need milk pudding daily with
my dinner."

"Who told you?" said Rashmani sharply.

"The doctor says it's very bad for biliousness."

"The doctor's a fool!"

"But I'm sure that rice agrees with me better than your _luchis_. They
are too indigestible."

"I've never seen the least sign of indigestion in you. You have been
accustomed to them all your life!"

Bhavani Charan was ready enough to make sacrifices, but there his
passage was barred. Butter might rise in price, but the number of his
_luchis_ never diminished. Milk was quite enough for him at his midday
meal, but curds also had to be supplied because that was the family
tradition. Rashmani could not have borne seeing him sit down to his
meal, if curds were not supplied. Therefore all his attempts to make a
breach in his daily provisions, through which the fanning foreign woman
might enter, were an utter failure.

Then Bhavani paid a visit to Bagala for no reason whatever, and after a
great deal of round about talk asked concerning the foreign doll. Of
course his straightened circumstances had long been known to Bagala, yet
it was a perfect misery to Bhavani to have to hesitate to buy this doll
for his son owing to want of ready money. Swallowing his pride, he
brought out from under his arm an expensive old Kashmir shawl, and said
in a husky voice: "My circumstances are bad just at present and I
haven't got much cash. So I have determined to mortgage this shawl and
buy that doll for Kalipada."

If the object offered had been less expensive than this Kashmir shawl,
Bagala would at once have closed the bargain. But knowing that it would
not be possible for him to take possession of this shawl in face of the
village opinion, and still more in face of Rashmani's watchfulness, he
refused to accept it; and Bhavani had to go back home disappointed with
the Kashmir shawl hidden under his arm.

Kalipada asked every day for that foreign fanning toy, and Bhavani
smiled every day and said,--"Wait, a bit, my boy, till the seventh day
of the moon comes round." But every new day it became more and more
difficult to keep up that smile.

On the fourth day of the moon Bhavani made a sudden inroad upon his wife
and said:

"I've noticed that there's something wrong with Kalipada,--something the
matter with his health."

"Nonsense," said Rashmani, "he's in the best of health."

"Haven't you noticed him sitting silent for hours together?"

"I should be very greatly relieved if he could sit still for as many
minutes."

When all his arrows had missed their mark, and no impression had been
made, Bhavani Charan heaved a deep sigh and passing his fingers through
his hair went away and sat down on the verandah and began to smoke with
fearful assiduity.

On the fifth day, at his morning meal, Bhavani passed by the curds and
the milk pudding without touching them. In the evening he simply took
one single piece of _sandesh_. The _luchis_ were left unheeded. He
complained of want of appetite. This time a considerable breach was made
in the fortifications.

On the sixth day, Rashmani took Kalipada into the room and sweetly
calling him by his pet name said, "Betu, you are old enough to know that
it is the halfway house to stealing to desire that which you can't
have."

Kalipada whimpered and said, "What do I know about it? Father promised
to give me that doll."

Rashmani sat down to explain to him how much lay behind his father's
promise,--how much pain, how much affection, how much loss and
privation. Rashmani had never in her life before talked thus to
Kalipada, because it was her habit to give short and sharp commands. It
filled the boy with amazement when he found his mother coaxing him and
explaining things at such a length, and mere child though he was, he
could fathom something of the deep suffering of his mother's heart. Yet
at the same time it will be easily understood, that it was hard for this
boy to turn his mind away altogether from that captivating foreign
fanning woman. He pulled a long face and began to scratch the ground.

This made Rashmani's heart at once hard, and she said in her severe
tone: "Yes, you may weep and cry, or become angry, but you shall never
get that which is not for you to have." And she hastened away without
another word.

Kalipada went out. Bhavani Charan was still smoking his hookah. Noticing
Kalipada from a distance he got up and walked in the opposite direction
as if he had some urgent business. Kalipada ran to him and said,--"But
that doll?" Bhavani could not raise a smile that day. He put his arm
round Kalipada's neck and said:

"Baba, wait a little. I have some pressing business to get through. Let
me finish it first, and then we will talk about it." Saying this, he
went out of his house.

Kalipada saw him brush a tear from his eyes. He stood at the door and
watched his father, and it was quite evident, even to this boy, that he
was going nowhere in particular, and that he was dragging the weight of
a despair which could not be relieved.

Kalipada at once went back to his mother and said:

"Mother, I don't want that foreign doll."

That morning Bhavani Charan returned late. When he sat down to his meal,
after his bath, it was quite evident, by the look on his face, that the
curds and the milk pudding would fare no better with him than on the day
before, and that the best part of the fish would go to the cat.

Just at this critical juncture Rashmani brought in a card-board box,
bound round with twine, and set it before her husband. Her intention had
been to reveal the mystery of this packet to her husband when he went to
take his nap after his meal. But in order to remove the undeserved
neglect of the curds and the milk and the fish, she had to disclose its
contents before the time. So the foreign doll came out of the box and
without more ado began to fan itself vigorously.

After this, the cat had to go away disappointed. Bhavani remarked to his
wife that the cooking was the best he had ever tasted. The fish soup was
incomparable: the curds had set themselves with an exactness that was
rarely attained, and the milk pudding was superb.

On the seventh day of the moon, Kalipada got the toy for which he had
been pining. During the whole of that day he allowed the foreigner to go
on fanning herself and thereby made his boy companions jealous. In any
other case this performance would have seemed to him monotonously
tiresome, but knowing that on the following day he would have to give
the toy back, his constancy to it on that single occasion remained
unabated. At the rental of two rupees per diem Rashmani had hired it
from Bagala.

On the eighth day of the moon, Kalipada heaved a deep sigh and returned
the toy, along with the box and twine, to Bagala with his own hands.
From that day forward Kalipada began to share the confidences of his
mother, and it became so absurdly easy for Bhavani to give expensive
presents every year, that it surprised even himself.

When, with the help of his mother, Kalipada came to know that nothing
in this world could be gained without paying for it with the inevitable
price of suffering, he rapidly grew up in his mind and became a valued
assistant to his mother in her daily tasks. It come to be a natural rule
of life with him that no one should add to the burden of the world, but
that each should try to lighten it.

When Kalipada won a scholarship at the Vernacular examination, Bhavani
proposed that he should give up his studies and take in hand the
supervision of the estate. Kalipada went to his mother and said,--"I
shall never be a man, if I do not complete my education."

The mother said,--"You are right, Baba, you must go to Calcutta."

Kalipada explained to her that it would not be necessary to spend a
single pice on him; his scholarship would be sufficient, and he would
try to get some work to supplement it.

But it was necessary to convince Bhavani of the wisdom of the course.
Rashmani did not wish to employ the argument that there was very little
of the estate remaining to require supervision; for she knew how it
would hurt him. She said that Kalipada must become a man whom everyone
could respect. But all the members of the Chowdhuri family had attained
their respectability without ever going a step outside the limits of
Saniari. The outer world was as unknown to them as the world beyond the
grave. Bhavani, therefore, could not conceive how anybody could think of
a boy like Kalipada going to Calcutta. But the cleverest man in the
village, Bagala, fortunately agreed with Rashmani.

"It is perfectly clear," he said, "that, one day, Kalipada will become a
lawyer; and then he will set matters right concerning the property of
which the family has been deprived."

This was a great consolation to Bhavani Charan and he brought out the
file of records about the theft of the will and tried to explain the
whole thing to Kalipada by dint of daily discussion. But his son was
lacking in proper enthusiasm and merely echoed his father's sentiment
about this solemn wrong.

The day before Kalipada's departure for Calcutta Rashmani hung round his
neck an amulet containing some mantras to protect him from evils. She
gave him at the same time a fifty-rupee currency note, advising him to
keep it for any special emergency. This note, which was the symbol of
his mother's numberless daily acts of self-denial, was the truest amulet
of all for Kalipada. He determined to keep it by him and never to spend
it, whatever might happen.


III

From this time onward the old interminable discussions about the theft
of the will became less frequent on the part of Bhavani. His one topic
of conversation was the marvellous adventure of Kalipada in search of
his education. Kalipada was actually engaged in his studies in the city
of Calcutta! Kalipada knew Calcutta as well as the palm of his hand!
Kalipada had been the first to hear the great news that another bridge
was going to be built over the Ganges near Hughli! The day on which the
father received his son's letter, he would go to every house in the
village to read it to his neighbours and he would hardly find time even
to take his spectacles from his nose. On arriving at a fresh house he
would remove them from their case with the utmost deliberation; then he
would wipe them carefully with the end of his _dhoti_; then, word by
word, he would slowly read the letter through to one neighbour after
another, with something like the following comment:--

"Brother, just listen! What _is_ the world coming to? Even the dogs and
the jackals are to cross the holy Ganges without washing the dust from
their feet! Who could imagine such a sacrilege?"

No doubt it was very deplorable; but all the same it gave Bhavani
Charan a peculiar pleasure to communicate at first hand such important
news from his own son's letter, and this more than compensated for the
spiritual disaster which must surely overtake the numberless creatures
of this present age. To everyone he met he solemnly nodded his head and
prophesied that the days were soon coming when Mother Ganges would
disappear altogether; all the while cherishing the hope that the news of
such a momentous event would come to him by letter from his own son in
the proper time.

Kalipada, with very great difficulty, scraped together just enough money
to pay his expenses till he passed his Matriculation and again won a
scholarship. Bhavani at once made up his mind to invite all the village
to a feast, for he imagined that his son's good ship of fortune had now
reached its haven and there would be no more occasion for economy. But
he received no encouragement from Rashmani.

Kalipada was fortunate enough to secure a place of study in a students'
lodging house near his college. The proprietor allowed him to occupy a
small room on the ground floor which was absolutely useless for other
lodgers. In exchange for this and his board, he had to coach the son of
the owner of the house. The one great advantage was that there would be
no chance of any fellow lodger ever sharing his quarters. So, although
ventilation was lacking, his studies were uninterrupted.

Those of the students who paid their rent and lived in the upper story
had no concern with Kalipada; but soon it became painfully evident that
those who are up above have the power to hurl missiles at those below
with all the more deadly force because of their distance. The leader of
those above was Sailen.

Sailen was the scion of a rich family. It was unnecessary for him to
live in a students' mess, but he successfully convinced his guardians
that this would be best for his studies. The real reason was that Sailen
was naturally fond of company, and the students' lodging house was an
ideal place where he could have all the pleasure of companionship
without any of its responsibilities. It was the firm conviction of
Sailen that he was a good fellow and a man of feeling. The advantage of
harbouring such a conviction was that it needed no proof in practice.
Vanity is not like a horse or an elephant requiring expensive fodder.

Nevertheless, as Sailen had plenty of money he did not allow his vanity
merely to graze at large; he took special pride in keeping it stall-fed.
It must be said to his credit that he had a genuine desire to help
people in their need, but the desire in him was of such a character,
that if a man in difficulty refused to come to him for help, he would
turn round on him and do his best to add to his trouble. His mess mates
had their tickets for the theatre bought for them by Sailen, and it cost
them nothing to have occasional feasts. They could borrow money from him
without meaning to pay it back. When a newly married youth was in doubt
about the choice of some gift for his wife, he could fully rely on
Sailen's good taste in the matter. On these occasions the love-lorn
youth would take Sailen to the shop and pretend to select the cheapest
and least suitable presents: then Sailen, with a contemptuous laugh
would intervene and select the right thing. At the mention of the price
the young husband would pull a long face, but Sailen would always be
ready to abide by his own superior choice and to pay the cost.

In this manner Sailen became the acknowledged patron of the students
upstairs. It made him intolerant of the insolence of any one who refused
to accept his help. Indeed, to help others in this way had become his
hobby.

Kalipada, in his tattered jersey, used to sit on a dirty mat in his damp
room below and recite his lessons, swinging himself from side to side to
the rhythm of the sentence. It was a sheer necessity for him to get
that scholarship next year.

Kalipada's mother had made him promise, before he left home for Calcutta
that he would avoid the company of rich young men. Therefore he bore the
burden of his indigence alone, strictly keeping himself from those who
had been more favoured by fortune. But to Sailen, it seemed a sheer
impertinence that a student as poor as Kalipada should yet have the
pride to keep away from his patronage. Besides this, in his food and
dress and everything, Kalipada's poverty was so blatantly exposed, it
hurt Sailen's sense of decency. Every time he looked down into
Kalipada's room, he was offended by the sight of the cheap clothing, the
dingy mosquito net and the tattered bedding. Whenever he passed on his
way to his own room in the upper story the sight of these things was
unavoidable. To crown it all there was that absurd amulet which Kalipada
always had hanging round his neck, and those daily rites of devotion
which were so ridiculously out of fashion!

One day Sailen and his followers condescended to invite Kalipada to a
feast, thinking that his gratitude would know no bounds. But Kalipada
sent an answer saying that his habits were different and it would not be
wholesome for him to accept the invitation. Sailen was unaccustomed to
such a refusal, and it roused up in him all the ferocity of his insulted
benevolence. For some days after this, the noise on the upper story
became so loudly insistent that it was impossible for Kalipada to go on
with his studies. He was compelled to spend the greater part of his days
studying in the Park, and to get up very early and sit down to his work
long before it was light.

Owing to his half-starved condition, his mental overwork, and
badly-ventilated room, Kalipada began to suffer from continual attacks
of headache. There were times when he was obliged to lie down on his bed
for three or four days together. But he made no mention of his illness
in his letters to his father. Bhavani himself was certain that, just as
vegetation grew rank in his village surroundings, so comforts of all
kinds sprang up of themselves from the soil of Calcutta. Kalipada never
for a moment disabused his mind of that misconception. He did not fail
to write to his father, even when suffering from one of these paroxysms
of pain. The deliberate rowdiness of the students in the upper story
added at such times to his distress.

Kalipada tried to make himself as scarce and small as possible, in order
to avoid notice; but this did not bring him relief. One day, he found
that a cheap shoe of his own had been taken away and replaced by an
expensive foreign one. It was impossible for him to go to college with
such an incongruous pair. He made no complaint, however, but bought some
old second-hand shoes from the cobbler. One day, a student from the
upper story came into his room and asked him:

"Have you, by any mistake, brought away my silver cigarette case with
you?"

Kalipada got annoyed and answered:

"I have never been inside your room in my life."

The student stooped down. "Hullo!" he said, "here it is!" And the
valuable cigarette case was picked up from the corner of the room.

Kalipada determined to leave this lodging house as soon as ever he had
passed his Intermediate Examination, provided only he could get a
scholarship to enable him to do so.

Every year the students of the house used to have their annual Saraswati
Puja. Though the greater part of the expenses fell to the share of
Sailen, every one else contributed according to his means. The year
before, they had contemptuously left out Kalipada from the list of
contributors; but this year, merely to tease him, they came with their
subscription book. Kalipada instantly paid five rupees to the fund,
though he had no intention of participating in the feast. His penury
had long brought on him the contempt of his fellow lodgers, but this
unexpected gift of five rupees became to them insufferable. The
Saraswati Puja was performed with great A(C)clat and the five rupees could
easily have been spared. It had been hard indeed for Kalipada to part
with it. While he took the food given him in his landlord's house he had
no control over the time at which it was served. Besides this, since the
servants brought him the food, he did not like to criticise the dishes.
He preferred to provide himself with some extra things; and after the
forced extravagance of his five-rupee subscription he had to forgo all
this and suffered in consequence. His paroxysms of headache became more
frequent, and though he passed his examination, he failed to obtain the
scholarship that he desired.

The loss of the scholarship drove Kalipada to do extra work as a private
tutor and to stick to the same unhealthy room in the lodging house. The
students overhead had hoped that they would be relieved of his presence.
But punctually to the day the room was unlocked on the lower floor.
Kalipada entered, clad in the same old dirty check Parsee coat. A coolie
from Sealdah Station took down from his head a steel trunk and other
miscellaneous packages and laid them on the floor of the room; and a
long wrangle ensued as to the proper amount of pice that were due.

In the depths of those packages there were mango chutnies and other
condiments which his mother had specially prepared. Kalipada was aware
that, in his absence, the upper-story students, in search of a jest, did
not scruple to come into his room by stealth.

He was especially anxious to keep these home gifts from their cruel
scrutiny. As tokens of home affection they were supremely precious to
him; but to the town students, they denoted merely the boorishness of
poverty-stricken villagers. The vessels were crude and earthen, fastened
up by an earthen lid fixed on with paste of flour. They were neither
glass nor porcelain, and therefore sure to be regarded with insolent
disdain by rich town-bred people.

Formerly Kalipada used to keep these stores hidden under his bed,
covering them up with old newspapers. But this time he took the
precaution of always locking up his door, even if he went out for a few
minutes. This still further roused the spleen of Sailen and his party.
It seemed to them preposterous that the room which was poor enough to
draw tears from the eyes of the most hardened burglar should be as
carefully guarded as if it were a second Bank of Bengal.

"Does he actually believe," they said among themselves, "that the
temptation will be irresistible for us to steal that Parsee coat?"

Sailen had never visited this dark and mildewed room from which the
plaster was dropping. The glimpses that he had taken, while going
up-stairs,--especially when, in the evening, Kalipada, the upper part of
his body bare, would sit poring over his books with a smoky lamp beside
him,--were enough to give him a sense of suffocation. Sailen asked his
boon companions to explore the room below and find out the treasure
which Kalipada had hidden. Everybody felt intensely amused at the
proposal.

The lock on Kalipada's door was a cheap one, which had the magnanimity
to lend itself to any key. One evening when Kalipada had gone out to his
private tuition, two or three of the students with an exuberant sense of
humour took a lantern and unlocked the room and entered. It did not need
a moment to discover the pots of chutney under the bed, but these hardly
seemed valuable enough to demand such watchful care on the part of
Kalipada. A further search disclosed a key on a ring under the pillow.
They opened the steel trunk with the key and found a few soiled clothes,
books and writing material. They were about to shut the box in disgust
when they saw, at the very bottom, a packet covered by a dirty
handkerchief. On uncovering three or four wrappers they found a currency
note of fifty rupees. This made them burst out into peals of laughter.
They felt certain that Kalipada was harbouring suspicion against the
whole world in his mind because of this fifty rupees!

The meanness of this suspicious precaution deepened the intensity of
their contempt for Kalipada. Just then, they heard a foot-step outside.
They hastily shut the box, locked the door, and ran upstairs with the
note in their possession.

Sailen was vastly amused. Though fifty rupees was a mere trifle, he
could never have believed that Kalipada had so much money in his trunk.
They all decided to watch the result of this loss upon that queer
creature downstairs.

When Kalipada came home that night after his tuition was over, he was
too tired to notice any disorder in his room. One of his worst attacks
of nervous headache was coming on and he went straight to bed.

The next day, when he brought out his trunk from under the bed and took
out his clothes, he found it open. He was naturally careful, but it was
not unlikely, he thought, that he had forgotten to lock it on the day
before. But when he lifted the lid he found all the contents
topsy-turvy, and his heart gave a great thud when he discovered that
the note, given to him by his mother, was missing. He searched the box
over and over again in the vain hope of finding it, and when his loss
was made certain, he flung himself upon his bed and lay like one dead.

Just then, he heard footsteps following one another on the stairs, and
every now and then an outburst of laughter from the upper room. It
struck him, all of a sudden, that this was not a theft: Sailen and his
party must have taken the note to amuse themselves and make laughter out
of it. It would have given him less pain if a thief had stolen it. It
seemed to him that these young men had laid their impious hands upon his
mother herself.

This was the first time that Kalipada had ascended those stairs. He ran
to the upper floor,--the old jersey on his shoulders,--his face flushed
with anger and the pain of his illness. As it was Sunday, Sailen and his
company were seated in the verandah, laughing and talking. Without any
warning, Kalipada burst upon them and shouted:

"Give me back my note!"

If he had begged it of them, they would have relented; but the sight of
his anger made them furious. They started up from their chairs and
exclaimed:

"What do you mean, sir? What do you mean? What note?"

Kalipada shouted: "The note you have taken from my box!"

"How dare you?" they shouted back. "Do you take us to be thieves?"

If Kalipada had held any weapon in his hand at that moment he certainly
would have killed some one among them. But when he was about to spring,
they fell on him, and four or five of them dragged him down to his room
and thrust him inside.

Sailen said to his companions: "Here, take this hundred-rupee note, and
throw it to that _dog_!"

They all loudly exclaimed: "No! Let him climb down first and give us a
written apology. Then we shall consider it!"

Sailen's party all went to bed at the proper time and slept the sleep of
the innocent. In the morning they had almost forgotten Kalipada. But
some of them, while passing his room, heard the sound of talking and
they thought that possibly he was busy consulting some lawyer. The door
was shut from the inside. They tried to overhear, but what they heard
had nothing legal about it. It was quite incoherent.

They informed Sailen. He came down and stood with his ear close to the
door. The only thing that could be distinctly heard was the word
'Father.' This frightened Sailen. He thought that possibly Kalipada had
gone mad on account of the grief of losing that fifty-rupee note. Sailen
shouted "Kalipada Babu!" two or three times, but got no answer. Only
that muttering sound continued. Sailen called,--"Kalipada Babu,--please
open the door. Your note has been found." But still the door was not
opened and that muttering sound went on.

Sailen had never anticipated such a result as this. He did not express a
word of repentance to his followers, but he felt the sting of it all the
same. Some advised him to break open the door: others thought that the
police should be called in,--for Kalipada might be in a dangerous state
of lunacy. Sailen at once sent for a doctor who lived close at hand.
When they burst open the door they found the bedding hanging from the
bed and Kalipada lying on the floor unconscious. He was tossing about
and throwing up his arms and muttering, with his eyes red and open and
his face all flushed. The doctor examined him and asked if there were
any relative near at hand; for the case was serious.

Sailen answered that he knew nothing, but would make inquiries. The
doctor then advised the removal of the patient at once to an upstairs
room and proper nursing arrangements day and night. Sailen took him up
to his own room and dismissed his followers. He got some ice and put it
on Kalipada's head and began to fan him with his own hand.

Kalipada, fearing that mocking references would be made, had concealed
the names and address of his parents from these people with special
care. So Sailen had no alternative but to open his box. He found two
bundles of letters tied up with ribbon. One of them contained his
mother's letters, the other contained his father's. His mother's letters
were fewer in number than his father's. Sailen closed the door and began
to read the letters. He was startled when he saw the address,--Saniari,
the house of the Chowdhuries,--and then the name of the father, Bhavani.
He folded up the letters and sat still, gazing at Kalipada's face. Some
of his friends had casually mentioned, that there was a resemblance
between Kalipada and himself. But he was offended at the remark and did
not believe it. To-day he discovered the truth. He knew that his own
grandfather, Shyama Charan, had a step-brother named Bhavani; but the
later history to the family had remained a secret to him. He did not
even know that Bhavani had a son named Kalipada; and he never suspected
that Bhavani had come to such an abject state of poverty as this. He now
felt not only relieved, but proud of his own relative, Kalipada, that
he had refused to enter himself on the list of protA(C)gA(C)s.


IV

Knowing that his party had insulted Kalipada almost every day, Sailen
felt reluctant to keep him in the lodging house with them. So he rented
another suitable house and kept him there. Bhavani came down in haste to
Calcutta the moment he received a letter from Sailen informing him of
his son's illness. Rashmani parted with all her savings giving
instructions to her husband to spare no expense upon her son. It was not
considered proper for the daughters of the great Chowdhuri family to
leave their home and go to Calcutta unless absolutely obliged, and
therefore she had to remain behind offering prayers to all the tutelary
gods. When Bhavani Charan arrived he found Kalipada still unconscious
and delirious. It nearly broke Bhavani's heart when he heard himself
called 'Master Mashai.' Kalipada often called him in his delirium and he
tried to make himself recognized by his son, but in vain.

The doctor came again and said the fever was getting less. He thought
the case was taking a more favourable turn. For Bhavani, it was an
impossibility to imagine that his son would not recover. He _must_
live: it was his destiny to live. Bhavani was much struck with the
behaviour of Sailen. It was difficult to believe that he was not of
their own kith and kin. He supposed all this kindness to be due to the
town training which Sailen had received. Bhavani spoke to Sailen
disparagingly of the country habits which village people like himself
got into.

Gradually the fever went down and Kalipada recovered consciousness. He
was astonished beyond measure when he saw his father sitting in the room
beside him. His first anxiety was lest he should discover the miserable
state in which he had been living. But what would be harder still to
bear was, if his father with his rustic manners became the butt of the
people upstairs. He looked round him, but could not recognize his own
room and wondered if he had been dreaming. But he found himself too weak
to think.

He supposed that it had been his father who had removed him to this
better lodging, but he had no power to calculate how he could possibly
bear the expense. The only thing that concerned him at that moment was
that he felt he must live, and for that he had a claim upon the world.

Once when his father was absent Sailen came in with a plate of grapes in
his hand. Kalipada could not understand this at all and wondered if
there was some practical joke behind it. He at once became excited and
wondered how he could save his father from annoyance. Sailen set the
plate down on the table and touched Kalipada's feet humbly and said: "My
offence has been great: pray forgive me."

Kalipada started and sat up on his bed. He could see that Sailen's
repentance was sincere and he was greatly moved.

When Kalipada had first come to the students' lodging house he had felt
strongly drawn towards this handsome youth. He never missed a chance of
looking at his face when Sailen passed by his room on his way upstairs.
He would have given all the world to be friends with him, but the
barrier was too great to overcome. Now to-day when Sailen brought him
the grapes and asked his forgiveness, he silently looked at his face and
silently accepted the grapes which spoke of his repentance.

It amused Kalipada greatly when he noticed the intimacy that had sprung
up between his father and Sailen. Sailen used to call Bhavani Charan
"grandfather" and exercised to the full the grandchild's privilege of
joking with him. The principal object of the jokes was the absent
"grandmother." Sailen made the confession that he had taken the
opportunity of Kalipada's illness to steal all the delicious chutnies
which his "grandmother" had made with her own hand. The news of his act
of "thieving" gave Kalipada very great joy. He found it easy to deprive
himself, if he could find any one who could appreciate the good things
made by his mother. Thus this time of his convalescence became the
happiest period in the whole of Kalipada's life.

There was only one flaw in this unalloyed happiness. Kalipada had a
fierce pride in his poverty which prevented him ever speaking about his
family's better days. Therefore when his father used to talk of his
former prosperity Kalipada winced. Bhavani could not keep to himself the
one great event of his life,--the theft of that will which he was
absolutely certain that he would some day recover. Kalipada had always
regarded this as a kind of mania of his father's, and in collusion with
his mother he had often humoured his father concerning this amiable
weakness. But he shrank in shame when his father talked about this to
Sailen. He noticed particularly that Sailen did not relish such
conversation and that he often tried to prove, with a certain amount of
feeling, its absurdity. But Bhavani, who was ready to give in to others
in matters much more serious, in this matter was adamant. Kalipada tried
to pacify him by saying that there was no great need to worry about it,
because those who were enjoying its benefit were almost the same as his
own children, since they were his nephews.

Such talk Sailen could not bear for long and he used to leave the room.
This pained Kalipada, because he thought that Sailen might get quite a
wrong conception of his father and imagine him to be a grasping worldly
old man. Sailen would have revealed his own relationship to Kalipada and
his father long before, but this discussion about the theft of the will
prevented him. It was hard for him to believe that his grandfather or
father had stolen the will; on the other hand he could not but think
that some cruel injustice had been done in depriving Bhavani of his
share of the ancestral property. Therefore he gave up arguing when the
subject was brought forward and took some occasion to leave as soon as
possible.

Though Kalipada still had headaches in the evening, with a slight rise
in temperature, he did not take it at all seriously. He became anxious
to resume his studies because he felt it would be a calamity to him if
he again missed his scholarship. He secretly began to read once more,
without taking any notice of the strict orders of the doctor. Kalipada
asked his father to return home, assuring him that he was in the best of
health. Bhavani had been all his life fed and nourished and cooked for
by his wife; he was pining to get back. He did not therefore wait to be
pressed.

On the morning of his intended departure, when he went to say good-bye
to Kalipada, he found him very ill indeed, his face red with fever and
his whole body burning. He had been committing to memory page after page
of his text book of Logic half through the night, and for the remainder
he could not sleep at all. The doctor took Sailen aside. "This relapse,"
he said, "is fatal." Sailen came to Bhavani and said, "The patient
requires a mother's nursing: she must be brought to Calcutta."

It was evening when Rashmani came, and she only saw her son alive for a
few hours. Not knowing how her husband could survive such a terrible
shock she altogether suppressed her own sorrow. Her son was merged in
her husband again, and she took up this burden of the dead and the
living on her own aching heart. She said to her God,--"It is too much
for me to bear." But she did bear it.


V

It was midnight. With the very weariness of her sorrow Rashmani had
fallen asleep soon after reaching her own home in the village. But
Bhavani had no sleep that night. Tossing on his bed for hours he heaved
a deep sigh saying,--"Merciful God!" Then he got up from his bed and
went out. He entered the room where Kalipada had been wont to do his
lessons in his childhood. The lamp shook as he held it in his hand. On
the wooden settle there was still the torn, ink-stained quilt, made long
ago by Rashmani herself. On the wall were figures of Euclid and Algebra
drawn in charcoal. The remains of a Royal Reader No. III and a few
exercise books were lying about; and the one odd slipper of his infancy,
which had evaded notice so long, was keeping its place in the dusty
obscurity of the corner of the room. To-day it had become so important
that nothing in the world, however great, could keep it hidden any
longer. Bhavani put the lamp in the niche on the wall and silently sat
on the settle; his eyes were dry, but he felt choked as if with want of
breath.

Bhavani opened the shutters on the eastern side and stood still,
grasping the iron bars, gazing into the darkness. Through the drizzling
rain he could see the outline of the clump of trees at the end of the
outer wall. At this spot Kalipada had made his own garden. The passion
flowers which he had planted with his own hand had grown densely thick.
While he gazed at this Bhavani felt his heart come up into his throat
with choking pain. There was nobody now to wait for and expect daily.
The summer vacation had come, but no one would come back home to fill
the vacant room and use its old familiar furniture.

"O Baba mine!" he cried, "O Baba! O Baba mine!"

He sat down. The rain came faster. A sound of footsteps was heard among
the grass and withered leaves. Bhavani's heart stood still. He hoped it
was ... that which was beyond all hope. He thought it was Kalipada
himself come to see his own garden,--and in this downpour of rain how
wet he would be! Anxiety about this made him restless. Then somebody
stood for a moment in front of the iron window bars. The cloak round his
head made it impossible for Bhavani to see his face clearly, but his
height was the same as that of Kalipada.

"Darling!" cried Bhavani, "You have come!" and he rushed to open the
door.

But when he came outside to the spot where the figure had stood, there
was no one to be seen. He walked up and down in the garden through the
drenching rain, but no one was there. He stood still for a moment
raising his voice and calling,--"Kalipada," but no answer came. The
servant, Noto, who was sleeping in the cowshed, heard his cry and came
out and coaxed him back to his room.

Next day, in the morning, Noto, while sweeping the room found a bundle
just underneath the grated window. He brought it to Bhavani who opened
it and found it was an old document. He put on his spectacles and after
reading a few lines came rushing in to Rashmani and gave the paper into
her hand.

Rashmani asked, "What is it?"

Bhavani replied, "It is the will!"

"Who gave it you?"

"He himself came last night to give it to me."

"What are you going to do with it?"

Bhavani said: "I have no need of it now." And he tore the will to
pieces.

When the news reached the village Bagala proudly nodded his head and
said: "Didn't I prophesy that the will would be recovered through
Kalipada?"

But the grocer Ramcharan replied: "Last night when the ten o'clock train
reached the Station a handsome looking young man came to my shop and
asked the way to the Chowdhuri's house and I thought he had some kind of
bundle in his hand."

"Absurd," said Bagala.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =detailed.= From the French "tailler," to cut. Compare _tailor_,
      _entail_, _retail_.

  =patrimony.= From the Latin "pater," a father. Compare _paternal_,
      _patriarch_, _patriot_. The ending -mony is from the Latin
      -monium. Compare _testimony_, _matrimony_, _sanctimony_.

  =revert.= From the Latin "vertere," to turn. Compare _convert_,
      _subvert_, _divert_, _invert_, _advert_, _version_, _conversion_,
      _adverse_.

  =amazement.= This word is of doubtful origin. We have the simpler form
      "maze" but do not know how it has come into English.

  =preposterous.= The Latin word "pre" means "before," and the Latin
      word "posterus" behind. The literal meaning, therefore, is
      "before-behind" and so "absurd," "outrageous."

  =treachery.= This comes from the Old French "treacher," to trick. It
      is to be distinguished from the word "traitor," which comes from
      the Latin "traditor," one who gives up another. Compare
      _intricate_, _trickery_, _trick_, _intrigue_.

  =parasites.= From the Greek word "sitos," food,--one who feeds on
      another.

  =property.= From the Latin "proprius," meaning "one's own." Compare
      _proper_, _appropriate_, _improper_.

  =haggle.= This is an Old Norwegian word which has come into English,
      meaning literally to chop.

  =good-for-nothing.= Such "phrase" words as these are not very common
      in English. They are more common in French. Compare the English
      _ne'er-do-well_, _lazybones_, _out-of-the-way_, and the French
      _coup-d'A(C)tat_, _nom-de-plume_, _fin-de-siA(C)cle_. On the other hand,
      adjectives made up of two words are quite common in English.
      Compare _simple-hearted_, _middle-aged._

  =rA(C)gime.= This word still retains its French form and accent and
      pronunciation. Little by little such French words become
      pronounced and spelt in an English form and take a permanent place
      in the language. For instance, the French word "morale" with
      accent on the last syllable is now becoming a common English word.
      In time it will probably be accented on the first syllable like
      ordinary English words and will drop its final "e."

  =gap.= This is another Old Norwegian word meaning a wide opening.
      Compare _gape_. These Norwegian words came into English somewhat
      plentifully at the time of the Danish Conquest.

  =sympathy.= From the Greek "syn" with, and "pathos" suffering. It
      should be noted that the word "compassion" from the Latin "cum"
      with, and "passio" suffering, has the same root meaning, viz.
      "suffering _with_ another."

  =law-suit.= The English word "suit" comes from the Latin "sequi," to
      follow, which in French becomes "suivre." We have two English
      forms, one form directly from the Latin, the other from the
      French. From the Latin _prosecute_, _persecute_, _consecutive_,
      _execute_. From the French _pursue_, _ensue_, _sue_.

        A "suit" in a game of cards means the cards that follow one
      another in a sequence.

        A "suit" of clothes means the trousers, coat, waistcoat,
      following the same pattern. Compare also the French word _suite_
      which has now been taken into English, e.g. a _suite_ of rooms, a
      _suite_ of furniture (pronounced like "sweet").

  =incoherence.= From the Latin "haerere," to stick. Compare _adhere_,
      _cohere_, _inherent_, _coherence_.

  =foreign.= From the Old French "forain," out of doors. The letter "g"
      has become wrongly inserted in this word as also in "sovereign."

  =bargain.= From the late Latin "barca," a boat, because trade was
      carried on by boats along the rivers. Compare _barque_, _barge_,
      _bark_.

  =husky.= From the noun husk,--as dry as a husk.

  =shawl.= From the Persian word "shAel." A considerable number of words
      are coming into use in English now from the East. One of the most
      curious recent ones is Blighty which is a corruption of wilayati,
      bilaiti. For words introduced into English compare _karma_,
      _sanyasi_, _fakir_, _brahmin_, _ghat_, _puggaree_, _pyjama_,
      _pucca_, _curry_, _chutney_, _chintz_, _cummerbund_, _khaki_,
      _rupee_, _durrie_, _turban_, _sepoy_.

  =doll.= This is a shortened form of the English girl's name Dorothy,
      Dolly, Doll. Compare _poll-parrot_ from Polly or Poll.

  =soup.= This word still retains its French form, without the final "e"
      (French _soupe_), but the English words _sup_, _supper_ have
      dropped their French spelling altogether.

  =ticket.= From the Old French "estiquette," meaning something fixed
      like a bill on the wall. (Compare the English word to "stick"
      which comes from the same root.)

  We have here a case of a French word branching off into two quite
      distinct English words,--"etiquette" and "ticket," each having its
      own meaning.

  =jersey.= One of the islands in the English Channel called Jersey
      first made this special form of woollen vest. Many English words
      are thus taken from the names of places. Compare _currant_
      (Corinth), _argosy_ (Ragusa), _calico_ (Calicut), _bronze_
      (Brundusium), _gipsy_ (Egyptian), _cashmere_ (Kashmir).

  =impertinence.= Originally this word means that which is not
      "pertinent," and so something "out-of-place." Later on it got the
      present meaning of something insolent.

  =mosquito.= From the Spanish. The word is the diminutive of the Latin
      "musca," a fly.

  =scruple.= From the Latin "scrupulus," a small sharp stone. This word
      meant first in English a very small weight of twenty grains; then
      it came to mean a slight weight on the mind or conscience. In the
      Trial Scene of Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice we have the
      original sense used,--"the twentieth part of one poor scruple."

  =exuberant.= From the Latin "uber," udder. Thus it comes to mean
      "flowing from the udder" and so "overflowing."

  =handkerchief.= "Kerchief" came from two French words "couvre," to
      cover, and "chef," the head. It meant a head cloth. Then a smaller
      cloth was used in the hand and this was called a hand-kerchief.

  =lunacy.= From the Latin "luna," the moon. In former times Europeans
      used to think that madness was due to some influence of the moon.
      Compare the word _moonstruck_.

  =algebra.= This is one of the many words from Arabic beginning with
      "al," the. Compare _alkali_, _albatross_, _alcohol_, _alembic_,
      _alchemy_, _alcove_.

  =Euclid.= This word was originally the name of a great Greek
      mathematical writer. His writings were called "Books of Euclid."
      Now the subject is usually called Geometry.

  =absurd.= From the Latin "surdus," deaf. Deaf people generally appear
      stupid to those who can hear. So this word has come to mean
      foolish or ridiculous.

  =topsy-turvy.= This probably is a shortened form of
      topside-turvy,--"turvy" being a colloquial corruption for "turned"
      or "turned over."




THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE




X

THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE


I

Once upon a time the Babus at Nayanjore were famous landholders. They
were noted for their princely extravagance. They would tear off the
rough border of their Dacca muslin, because it rubbed against their
delicate skin. They could spend many thousands of rupees over the
wedding of a kitten. And on a certain grand occasion it is alleged that
in order to turn night into day they lighted numberless lamps and
showered silver threads from the sky to imitate sunlight.

Those were the days before the flood. The flood came. The line of
succession among these old-world Babus, with their lordly habits, could
not continue for long. Like a lamp with too many wicks burning, the oil
flared away quickly, and the light went out.

Kailas Babu, our neighbour, is the last relic of this extinct
magnificence. Before he grew up, his family had very nearly reached its
lowest ebb. When his father died, there was one dazzling outburst of
funeral extravagance, and then insolvency. The property was sold to
liquidate the debt. What little ready money was left over was altogether
insufficient to keep up the past ancestral splendours.

Kailas Babu left Nayanjore and came to Calcutta. His son did not remain
long in this world of faded glory. He died, leaving behind him an only
daughter.

In Calcutta we are Kailas Babu's neighbours. Curiously enough our own
family history is just the opposite of his. My father got his money by
his own exertions, and prided himself on never spending a penny more
than was needed. His clothes were those of a working man, and his hands
also. He never had any inclination to earn the title of Babu by
extravagant display; and I myself, his only son, owe him gratitude for
that. He gave me the very best education, and I was able to make my way
in the world. I am not ashamed of the fact that I am a self-made man.
Crisp bank-notes in my safe are dearer to me than a long pedigree in an
empty family chest.

I believe this was why I disliked seeing Kailas Babu drawing his heavy
cheques on the public credit from the bankrupt bank of his ancient Babu
reputation. I used to fancy that he looked down on me, because my father
had earned money with his own hands.

I ought to have noticed that no one showed any vexation towards Kailas
Babu except myself. Indeed it would have been difficult to find an old
man who did less harm than he. He was always ready with his kindly
little acts of courtesy in times of sorrow and joy. He would join in all
the ceremonies and religious observances of his neighbours. His familiar
smile would greet young and old alike. His politeness in asking details
about domestic affairs was untiring. The friends who met him in the
street were perforce ready to be button-holed, while a long string of
questions of this kind followed one another from his lips:

"My dear friend, I am delighted to see you. Are you quite well? How is
Shashi? And Dada--is he all right? Do you know, I've only just heard
that Madhu's son has got fever. How is he? Have you heard? And Hari
Charan Babu--I have not seen him for a long time--I hope he is not ill.
What's the matter with Rakkhal? And er--er, how are the ladies of your
family?"

Kailas Babu was spotlessly neat in his dress on all occasions, though
his supply of clothes was sorely limited. Every day he used to air his
shirts and vests and coats and trousers carefully, and put them out in
the sun, along with his bed-quilt, his pillowcase, and the small carpet
on which he always sat. After airing them he would shake them, and
brush them, and put them carefully away. His little bits of furniture
made his small room decent, and hinted that there was more in reserve if
needed. Very often, for want of a servant, he would shut up his house
for a while. Then he would iron out his shirts and linen with his own
hands, and do other little menial tasks. After this he would open his
door and receive his friends again.

Though Kailas Babu, as I have said, had lost all his landed property, he
had still some family heirlooms left. There was a silver cruet for
sprinkling scented water, a filigree box for otto-of-roses, a small gold
salver, a costly ancient shawl, and the old-fashioned ceremonial dress
and ancestral turban. These he had rescued with the greatest difficulty
from the money-lenders' clutches. On every suitable occasion he would
bring them out in state, and thus try to save the world-famed dignity of
the Babus of Nayanjore. At heart the most modest of men, in his daily
speech he regarded it as a sacred duty, owed to his rank, to give free
play to his family pride. His friends would encourage this trait in his
character with kindly good-humour, and it gave them great amusement.

The neighbourhood soon learnt to call him their Thakur Dada. They would
flock to his house and sit with him for hours together. To prevent his
incurring any expense, one or other of his friends would bring him
tobacco and say: "Thakur Dada, this morning some tobacco was sent to me
from Gaya. Do take it and see how you like it."

Thakur Dada would take it and say it was excellent. He would then go on
to tell of a certain exquisite tobacco which they once smoked in the old
days of Nayanjore at the cost of a guinea an ounce.

"I wonder," he used to say, "if any one would like to try it now. I have
some left, and can get it at once."

Every one knew that, if they asked for it, then somehow or other the key
of the cupboard would be missing; or else Ganesh, his old family
servant, had put it away somewhere.

"You never can be sure," he would add, "where things go to when servants
are about. Now, this Ganesh of mine,--I can't tell you what a fool he
is, but I haven't the heart to dismiss him."

Ganesh, for the credit of the family, was quite ready to bear all the
blame without a word.

One of the company usually said at this point: "Never mind, Thakur Dada.
Please don't trouble to look for it. This tobacco we're smoking will do
quite well. The other would be too strong."

Then Thakur Dada would be relieved and settle down again, and the talk
would go on.

When his guests got up to go away, Thakur Dada would accompany them to
the door and say to them on the door-step: "Oh, by the way, when are you
all coming to dine with me?"

One or other of us would answer: "Not just yet, Thakur Dada, not just
yet. We'll fix a day later."

"Quite right," he would answer. "Quite right. We had much better wait
till the rains come. It's too hot now. And a grand rich dinner such as I
should want to give you would upset us in weather like this."

But when the rains did come, every one was very careful not to remind
him of his promise. If the subject was brought up, some friend would
suggest gently that it was very inconvenient to get about when the rains
were so severe, and therefore it would be much better to wait till they
were over. Thus the game went on.

Thakur Dada's poor lodging was much too small for his position, and we
used to condole with him about it. His friends would assure him they
quite understood his difficulties: it was next to impossible to get a
decent house in Calcutta. Indeed, they had all been looking out for
years for a house to suit him. But, I need hardly add, no friend had
been foolish enough to find one. Thakur Dada used to say, with a sigh of
resignation: "Well, well, I suppose I shall have to put up with this
house after all." Then he would add with a genial smile: "But, you know,
I could never bear to be away from my friends. I must be near you. That
really compensates for everything."

Somehow I felt all this very deeply indeed. I suppose the real reason
was, that when a man is young, stupidity appears to him the worst of
crimes. Kailas Babu was not really stupid. In ordinary business matters
every one was ready to consult him. But with regard to Nayanjore his
utterances were certainly void of common sense. Because, out of amused
affection for him, no one contradicted his impossible statements, he
refused to keep them in bounds. When people recounted in his hearing the
glorious history of Nayanjore with absurd exaggerations, he would accept
all they said with the utmost gravity, and never doubted, even in his
dreams, that any one could disbelieve it.


II

When I sit down and try to analyse the thoughts and feelings that I had
towards Kailas Babu, I see that there was a still deeper reason for my
dislike. I will now explain.

Though I am the son of a rich man, and might have wasted time at
college, my industry was such that I took my M.A. degree in Calcutta
University when quite young. My moral character was flawless. In
addition, my outward appearance was so handsome, that if I were to call
myself beautiful, it might be thought a mark of self-estimation, but
could not be considered an untruth.

There could be no question that among the young men of Bengal I was
regarded by parents generally as a very eligible match. I was myself
quite clear on the point and had determined to obtain my full value in
the marriage market. When I pictured my choice, I had before my mind's
eye a wealthy father's only daughter, extremely beautiful and highly
educated. Proposals came pouring in to me from far and near; large sums
in cash were offered. I weighed these offers with rigid impartiality in
the delicate scales of my own estimation. But there was no one fit to be
my partner. I became convinced, with the poet Bhabavuti, that,

    In this world's endless time and boundless space
    One _may_ be born at last to match my sovereign grace.

But in this puny modern age, and this contracted space of modern
Bengal, it was doubtful if the peerless creature existed as yet.

Meanwhile my praises were sung in many tunes, and in different metres,
by designing parents.

Whether I was pleased with their daughters or not, this worship which
they offered was never unpleasing. I used to regard it as my proper due,
because I was so good. We are told that when the gods withhold their
boons from mortals they still expect their worshippers to pay them
fervent honour and are angry if it is withheld. I had that divine
expectance strongly developed in myself.

I have already mentioned that Thakur Dada had an only grand-daughter. I
had seen her many times, but had never mistaken her for beautiful. No
thought had ever entered my mind that she would be a possible partner
for myself. All the same, it seemed quite certain to me that some day or
other Kailas Babu would offer her, with all due worship, as an oblation
at my shrine. Indeed--this was the inner secret of my dislike--I was
thoroughly annoyed that he had not done so already.

I heard that Thakur Dada had told his friends that the Babus of
Nayanjore never craved a boon. Even if the girl remained unmarried, he
would not break the family tradition. It was this arrogance of his that
made me angry. My indignation smouldered for some time. But I remained
perfectly silent and bore it with the utmost patience, because I was so
good.

As lightning accompanies thunder, so in my character a flash of humour
was mingled with the mutterings of my wrath. It was, of course,
impossible for me to punish the old man merely to give vent to my rage;
and for a long time I did nothing at all. But suddenly one day such an
amusing plan came into my head, that I could not resist the temptation
of carrying it into effect.

I have already said that many of Kailas Babu's friends used to flatter
the old man's vanity to the full. One, who was a retired Government
servant, had told him that whenever he saw the Chota LAct Sahib he always
asked for the latest news about the Babus of Nayanjore, and the Chota
LAct had been heard to say that in all Bengal the only really respectable
families were those of the Maharaja of Cossipore and the Babus of
Nayanjore. When this monstrous falsehood was told to Kailas Babu he was
extremely gratified and often repeated the story. And wherever after
that he met this Government servant in company he would ask, along with
other questions:

"Oh! er--by the way, how is the Chota LAct Sahib? Quite well, did you
say? Ah, yes, I am so delighted to hear it! And the dear Mem Sahib, is
she quite well too? Ah, yes! and the little children--are they quite
well also? Ah, yes! that's very good news! Be sure and give them my
compliments when you see them."

Kailas Babu would constantly express his intention of going some day and
paying a visit to the Lord Sahib. But it may be taken for granted that
many Chota LActs and Burra LActs also would come and go, and much water
would pass down the Hoogly, before the family coach of Nayanjore would
be furbished up to pay a visit to Government House.

One day I took Kailas Babu aside and told him in a whisper: "Thakur
Dada, I was at the Levee yesterday, and the Chota LAct Sahib happened to
mention the Babus of Nayanjore. I told him that Kailas Babu had come to
town. Do you know, he was terribly hurt because you hadn't called. He
told me he was going to put etiquette on one side and pay you a private
visit himself this very afternoon."

Anybody else could have seen through this plot of mine in a moment. And,
if it had been directed against another person, Kailas Babu would have
understood the joke. But after all that he had heard from his friend the
Government servant, and after all his own exaggerations, a visit from
the Lieutenant-Governor seemed the most natural thing in the world. He
became highly nervous and excited at my news. Each detail of the coming
visit exercised him greatly,--most of all his own ignorance of English.
How on earth was that difficulty to be met? I told him there was no
difficulty at all: it was aristocratic not to know English: and,
besides, the Lieutenant-Governor always brought an interpreter with him,
and he had expressly mentioned that this visit was to be private.

About midday, when most of our neighbours are at work, and the rest are
asleep, a carriage and pair stopped before the lodging of Kailas Babu.
Two flunkeys in livery came up the stairs, and announced in a loud
voice, "The Chota LAct Sahib has arrived!" Kailas Babu was ready, waiting
for him, in his old-fashioned ceremonial robes and ancestral turban, and
Ganesh was by his side, dressed in his master's best suit of clothes for
the occasion.

When the Chota LAct Sahib was announced, Kailas Babu ran panting and
puffing and trembling to the door, and led in a friend of mine, in
disguise, with repeated salaams, bowing low at each step and walking
backward as best he could. He had his old family shawl spread over a
hard wooden chair and he asked the LAct Sahib to be seated. He then made
a high-flown speech in Urdu, the ancient Court language of the Sahibs,
and presented on the golden salver a string of gold _mohurs_, the last
relics of his broken fortune. The old family servant Ganesh, with an
expression of awe bordering on terror, stood behind with the
scent-sprinkler, drenching the LAct Sahib, and touched him gingerly from
time to time with the otto-of-roses from the filigree box.

Kailas Babu repeatedly expressed his regret at not being able to receive
His Honour Bahadur with all the ancestral magnificence of his own family
estate at Nayanjore. There he could have welcomed him properly with due
ceremonial. But in Calcutta he was a mere stranger and sojourner,--in
fact a fish out of water.

My friend, with his tall silk hat on, very gravely nodded. I need hardly
say that according to English custom the hat ought to have been removed
inside the room. But my friend did not dare to take it off for fear of
detection: and Kailas Babu and his old servant Ganesh were sublimely
unconscious of the breach of etiquette.

After a ten minutes' interview, which consisted chiefly of nodding the
head, my friend rose to his feet to depart. The two flunkeys in livery,
as had been planned beforehand, carried off in state the string of gold
_mohurs_, the gold salver, the old ancestral shawl, the silver
scent-sprinkler, and the otto-of-roses filigree box; they placed them
ceremoniously in the carriage. Kailas Babu regarded this as the usual
habit of Chota LAct Sahibs.

I was watching all the while from the next room. My sides were aching
with suppressed laughter. When I could hold myself in no longer, I
rushed into a further room, suddenly to discover, in a corner, a young
girl sobbing as if her heart would break. When she saw my uproarious
laughter she stood upright in passion, flashing the lightning of her big
dark eyes in mine, and said with a tear-choked voice: "Tell me! What
harm has my grandfather done to you? Why have you come to deceive him?
Why have you come here? Why----"

She could say no more. She covered her face with her hands and broke
into sobs.

My laughter vanished in a moment. It had never occurred to me that there
was anything but a supremely funny joke in this act of mine, and here I
discovered that I had given the cruellest pain to this tenderest little
heart. All the ugliness of my cruelty rose up to condemn me. I slunk out
of the room in silence, like a kicked dog.

Hitherto I had only looked upon Kusum, the grand-daughter of Kailas
Babu, as a somewhat worthless commodity in the marriage market, waiting
in vain to attract a husband. But now I found, with a shock of
surprise, that in the corner of that room a human heart was beating.

The whole night through I had very little sleep. My mind was in a
tumult. On the next day, very early in the morning, I took all those
stolen goods back to Kailas Babu's lodgings, wishing to hand them over
in secret to the servant Ganesh. I waited outside the door, and, not
finding any one, went upstairs to Kailas Babu's room. I heard from the
passage Kusum asking her grandfather in the most winning voice: "Dada,
dearest, do tell me all that the Chota LAct Sahib said to you yesterday.
Don't leave out a single word. I am dying to hear it all over again."

And Dada needed no encouragement. His face beamed over with pride as he
related all manner of praises which the LAct Sahib had been good enough
to utter concerning the ancient families of Nayanjore. The girl was
seated before him, looking up into his face, and listening with rapt
attention. She was determined, out of love for the old man, to play her
part to the full.

My heart was deeply touched, and tears came to my eyes. I stood there in
silence in the passage, while Thakur Dada finished all his
embellishments of the Chota LAct Sahib's wonderful visit. When he left
the room at last, I took the stolen goods and laid them at the feet of
the girl and came away without a word.

Later in the day I called again to see Kailas Babu himself. According to
our ugly modern custom, I had been in the habit of making no greeting at
all to this old man when I came into the room. But on this day I made a
low bow and touched his feet. I am convinced the old man thought that
the coming of the Chota LAct Sahib to his house was the cause of my new
politeness. He was highly gratified by it, and an air of benign serenity
shone from his eyes. His friends had looked in, and he had already begun
to tell again at full length the story of the Lieutenant-Governor's
visit with still further adornments of a most fantastic kind. The
interview was already becoming an epic, both in quality and in length.

When the other visitors had taken their leave, I made my proposal to the
old man in a humble manner. I told him that, "though I could never for a
moment hope to be worthy of marriage connection with such an illustrious
family, yet ... etc. etc."

When I made clear my proposal of marriage, the old man embraced me and
broke out in a tumult of joy: "I am a poor man, and could never have
expected such great good fortune."

That was the first and last time in his life that Kailas Babu confessed
to being poor. It was also the first and last time in his life that he
forgot, if only for a single moment, the ancestral dignity that belongs
to the Babus of Nayanjore.


WORDS TO BE STUDIED

  =landholder.= This method of forming compound words from two original
      English words should be studied. Compare the following words
      which have "land" for one of their parts: _landlord_,
      _landowner_, _landlady_, _landslip_, _landfall_. When the second
      word is not very closely attached to the first word, a hyphen is
      put between, thus _land-grabber_, _land-shark_.

  =extinct.= From the Latin "stinguere," to quench. Compare _distinct_,
      _instinct_, _extinguish_, _distinguish_.

  =cheque.= This word is the same as "check,"--only in this case the
      original French form has been kept. The verb to "check" came into
      English originally from the game of chess. In Eastern lands when
      the chess king was in danger the word "Shah!" was called out, and
      when the chess king could not move, "Shah mata!" These were
      corrupted into "Check!" and "Checkmate!"

  =bankrupt.= This word is a curious mixture of the old French "banque"
      (compare _bench_, _banquet_) and the Latin "rumpere," to break
      (compare _corrupt_, _disrupt_). It is thus a hybrid word in modern
      English.

  =filigree.= From two Latin words, "filum," a thread, and "granum," a
      grain.

  =otto-of-roses.= A corruption of attar. The word is originally Arabic
      and Persian.

  =turban.= This word has now taken its place in most of the European
      languages. It has come to Europe from the Turkish "tulbend" and
      the Persian "dulband."

  =tobacco.= This word came originally from Central America. It was
      brought to Europe by the Spaniards, who pronounced it "tabaco." It
      has now travelled all round the world, and has gained a place in
      all the Indian vernaculars as well as in the Further East.

  =boon.= The Old English word "ben" meant a prayer, and this was the
      original meaning of "boon." But a new word appeared in English,
      viz. the adjective "boon" from the French "bon," meaning "good."
      (Compare _boon companion_). This influenced the earlier word,
      which thus gained its present meaning of a "blessing" or "gift."

  =smoulder.= "Smolder" is an Old English word meaning "smoke." Cognate
      words in English are _smother_ and _small_, which come from the
      same root.

  =gingerly.= The origin of this word is very doubtful. Some connect it
      with "ging" or "gang," meaning "to go." Others with "gent-"
      meaning "gentle" or "graceful." The word has no relation to
      "ginger" which is an Eastern word coming originally from the
      Sanskrit _ASec.raga-vera_ and the Hindustani _zunjubil_.

  =fantastic.= From the Greek "phainA," to manifest. Compare _emphasis_,
      _emphatic_, _fantasy_, _fancy_, _phenomenon_.




NOTES




NOTES


I.--THE CABULIWALLAH

"The Cabuliwallah" is one of the most famous of the Poet's "Short
Stories." It has been often translated. The present translation is by
the late Sister Nivedita, and her simple, vivid style should be noticed
by the Indian student reader. It is a good example of modern English,
with its short sentences, its careful choice of words, and its luminous
clearness of meaning.

  =Cabuliwallah.=] A man from Cabul or Kabul, the capital of
      Afghanistan.

  =embarked.=] Like a ship putting out to sea on a new voyage.

  =Bhola.=] Mini's attendant.

  =Protap Singh.=] Rabindranath Tagore pictures himself as engaged in
      writing a novel, full of wild adventures. These names are made up
      to suit the story.

  =so precarious.=] The writer amusingly imagines the hero and heroine
      actually swinging by the rope until he can get back to his desk
      and finish writing about how they escaped.

  =Abdurrahman.=] The Amir of Kabul.

  =Frontier policy.=] The question about guarding the North-West of
      India against invasion.

  =without demur.=] Without making any objection, or asking for more
      money.

  =judicious bribery.=] He gave her little presents, _judging_ well what
      she would like best.

  =new fangled.=] The parents had not talked about such things, as
      old-fashioned people would have certainly done.

  =euphemism.=] This means, in Greek, "fair speech." Here it means a
      pleasant word used instead of the unpleasant word "jail."

  =kings went forth.=] During the hot weather the kings of ancient India
      used to stay at home: they would begin to fight again at the
      beginning of the cold weather.

  =my heart would go out.=] That is to say, he would long to see such
      places.

  =fall to weaving.=] This is an English idiom, like "set to": it means
      to begin.

  =conjure themselves.=] Just as the conjurer makes all kinds of things
      appear before the eyes.

  =vegetable existence.=] Vegetables are rooted to the ground. So
      Rabindranath is rooted to his desk and cannot make long journeys.

  =As it was indefinite.=] Because there was no actual reason for it.
      Indefinite here means vague.

  =forbid the man the house.=] This is a brief way of saying forbid the
      man to enter the house.

  =bebagged.=] This word is made up for the occasion, and means "laden
      with bags." Compare the words bedewed, besmeared.

  =just where.=] The word "just" has become very commonly used in modern
      English. It means "exactly," "merely" or "at the very moment."
      Compare "He had just gone out." "It was just a joke."

  =Scarcely on speaking terms.=] Rabindranath Tagore is here making a
      joke; "not to be on speaking terms" means usually "to be
      displeased with." Mini had become so eager to talk with her girl
      friends that she had almost neglected her father.

  =Durga.=] The Durga Festival in Bengal is supposed to represent the
      time when Parvati, or Durga, left her father's home in the
      Himalayas, called Kailas, and went to live with her husband,
      Siva.

  =Bhairavi.=] One of the musical tunes which denotes separation.

  =chandeliers.=] The glass ornamental hangings on which candles were
      lighted in great houses at weddings.

  =better-omened.=] It was not considered a good omen, or good fortune,
      to meet a criminal on a wedding day.

  =dispersed.=] Used up.

  =Parbati.=] Another allusion to the Goddess Durga and her home in the
      Himalayas.

  =apparition.=] This word comes from the same root as the word to
      "appear." It means a sudden or strange sight. It often means a
      ghost. Mini had so changed that when she appeared in her wedding
      dress she startled him, as if he had seen a ghost.

  =make friends with her anew.=] His own daughter would not know him at
      first.

  =Saw before him the barren mountains.=] His memory was so strong that
      it made him forget the crowded Calcutta street and think of his
      home in the mountains.


II.--THE HOME-COMING

  =every one seconded the proposal.=] All were so eagerly in favour
      that they wanted to speak at once in support of it.

  =regal dignity.=] His position as a king of the other boys.

  =fertile brain.=] Full of inventions and plans.

  =manoeuvre.=] A French word meaning a plan of battle.

  =point of honour.=] He would feel himself disgraced if he gave way.

  =Mother Earth.=] Earth is here pictured as a person. There is a
      well-known story of a giant who gained fresh power every time his
      body touched the earth, which was his Mother.

  =Furies.=] These were supposed to be certain demons, who pursued
      guilty men with loud cries.

  =the servant was master.=] Notice the play of words here. The
      "servant" and "master" change places.

  =critical juncture.=] At this exact moment when things were so
      dangerous.

  =Dada.=] The usual Bengal word for "Brother."

  =no love was lost.=] This is a mild way of saying that they disliked
      one another.

  =on pins and needles.=] Exceedingly restless; like some one standing
      on sharp points.

  =in perpetuity.=] The phrase is a mock legal one, meaning "for all
      time."

  =by no means pleased.=] She was very displeased, because she had
      already children of her own. In English a phrase is often put in a
      negative way to imply a very strong positive statement. Thus "by
      no means happy" may mean "very unhappy."

  =committing such an indiscretion.=] Doing such an unwise thing.

  =indecent haste.=] A mock humorous expression, meaning "very quickly."

  =craves for recognition.=] Wishes to be noticed and loved.

  =physical love.=] Just as a young animal clings to its mother for
      protection.

  =animal instinct.=] The phrase repeats in another form what was said
      before, in the words "a kind of physical love."

  =pursed her lips.=] Drew her lips tight like the mouth of a purse
      which is tightened by pulling the string.

  =as if expecting some one.=] He was looking for his mother.

  =very critical.=] Very dangerous. The danger point of the illness
      might be reached at any moment and death might come.

  =By the mark.=] When a shallow place comes at sea, or on a great
      river, one of the sailors throws a piece of lead, with a string
      tied to it, into the water, and then looks at the _mark_ on the
      string. He calls out that the depth is "three" or "four" fathoms
      according to the mark.

  =plumb-line.=] The line with a lead weight.

  =plumbing.=] To plumb is to get to the bottom of a piece of water.
      Here Phatik is pictured as himself going deeper and deeper into
      the sea of death, which none can fathom.

  =the holidays.=] The Bengali word for "holiday" means also "release."
      It is as though he were saying, "My release has come." This cannot
      be represented in the English.


III.--ONCE THERE WAS A KING

In this story Rabindranath Tagore begins with some amusing sentences
about the dull, matter of fact character of modern scientific people,
who cannot enjoy a fairy story without asking "Is it true?" The Poet
implies that there are deeper truths than modern science has yet
discovered. The ending of the present story will show this more clearly.

  =sovereign truth.=] There is a play upon the word "sovereign" which
      can mean "kingly" and also "supreme."

  =exacting.=] There is further play here with the words "exact" and
      "exacting." "Exact" means precise and "exacting" means making
      others precise.

  =legendary haze.=] The ancient legends are very obscure, just like an
      object seen through a mist.

  =knowledge.=] Mere book knowledge,--knowledge of outside things.

  =truth.=] Inner truth such as comes from the heart of man and cannot
      be reasoned or disputed.

  =half past seven.=] The time when his tutor was due.

  =no other need.=] As if God would continue the rain merely to keep his
      tutor away!

  =If not.=] Though it might not have been caused by his prayers, still
      for some reason the rain did continue.

  =nor did my teacher.=] Supply the words "give up."

  =punishment to fit the crime.=] An amusing reference to the doctrine
      of _karma_, which states that each deed will have its due reward
      or punishment.

  =as me.=] Strictly speaking it should be "I" not "me" but he is
      writing not too strictly.

  =I hope no child.=] The author here amusingly pretends that the
      child's way of getting out of his lessons was too shocking for
      young boys in the junior school to read about.

  =I will marry my daughter to him.=] The verb to "marry" in English can
      be used in two  senses:--

        (1) To wed some one: to take in marriage.

        (2) To get some one wedded: to give in marriage.

  The later sense is used here.

  =in the dawn of some indefinite time.=] In some past existence long
      ago.

  =If my grandmother were an author.=] Here Rabindranath returns to his
      mocking humour. A modern author, he says, would be obliged to
      explain all sorts of details in the story.

  =hue and cry.=] This is a phrase used for the noise and bustle that is
      made when people are searching for a thief.

  =Her readers.=] Referring back to the Grandmother.

  =in an underhand way.=] Under the disguise of a fairy story.

  =grandmother again.=] That is, in the old conditions when people were
      not too exacting about accuracy.

  =luckless grandson.=] A humorous way of referring to himself. The
      author had the misfortune to be born in the modern age of science.

  =Seven wings.=] The word "wings" is here used, not for "wings" like
      those of birds, but for the sides of a large building, projecting
      out at an angle from the main building.

  =But what is the use....=] The author here breaks off the story, as
      though it were useless to go on any further in these modern days
      when every thing has to be scientifically proved.

  =Some "what then?"=] Some future existence about which explanations
      might be asked.

  =no grandmother of a grandmother.=] No one, however old.

  =never admits defeat.=] Refuses to believe in death.

  =teacherless evening=.] Evening on which the teacher did not come.

  =chamber of the great end.=] Death itself is referred to; it is the
      end of human life on earth and what is beyond death is shut out
      from us.

  =incantation.=] Sacred verses or _mantras_.


IV.--THE RETURN OF THE CHILD

  =found two masters.=] The wife was his master now, as well as her
      husband.

  =make for safety.=] Get to some place where he could not be caught.

  =will be a judge some day.=] The baby seemed so wise to Raicharan,
      that he thought he would certainly grow up to be a judge.

  =epoch in human history.=] It seemed to Raicharan as though some great
      event had happened which ought to be recorded.

  =wrestler's trick.=] The writer, in fun, makes Raicharan's skill
      depend on doing just what the wrestler tries to avoid, i.e. being
      thrown on his back.

  =swallowed down.=] Washed them away in a flood.

  =little despot.=] The baby, who was able to make Raicharan do exactly
      what he liked.

  =The silent ceremonial.=] The author pictures the sunset as like some
      splendid kingly ceremony, where every gorgeous colour can be seen.

  ="Pitty fow."=] "Pretty flower." The baby can only lisp the words.

  =He was promoted from a horse into a groom.=] He was no longer asked
      by the baby to be a "horse" in his games, but to look after this
      toy carriage, as a groom would.

  =with all sorts of curious noises.=] He began to imitate the sounds of
      birds.

  =destined to be a judge.=] The baby could see through Raicharan's
      attempts to deceive, as a judge would see through false evidence.

  =wavelets.=] The little waves seemed like so many thousand little
      children running away in fun or mischief.

  =there was no one there.=] These words are repeated again and again to
      give the sense of utter loss and desolation.

  =overwhelming resentment.=] His own baby seemed to have been given to
      him in order to tempt him to forget his little Master. Raicharan
      was angry to think that any one could imagine such forgetfulness
      to be possible.

  =The little Master could not cast off the spell.=] Could not keep away
      from the servant who loved him so much. He fancies his little
      Master has come back to life again in this new little baby, drawn
      as it were by some enchantment of love.

  =accumulated.=] Gathered together: referring to the idea of _karma_.

  =personal appearance.=] He spent a long time in arranging his clothes
      and making himself look handsome.

  =country manners.=] Country people have habits and ways of speaking
      which seem absurd to town people.

  =a kind of condescension.=] As if he were superior and Raicharan were
      beneath him.

  =mendicant quack.=] A beggar dealing in herbs and medicines and
      charms.

  =hungry, eager eyes.=] As if she could never gaze long enough upon
      him.

  =the magistrate in him.=] The magistrate's way of looking at things.

  =magisterial conscience.=] His instincts as a judge, who must condemn
      the guilty.


V.--MASTER MASHAI

  =Ratikanta.=] He is represented throughout as a typical hanger-on of
      the rich family, selfish and flattering.

  =Victor Hugo.=] The most famous of Victor Hugo's stories is called
      "Les Miserables." Its opening scene of San Valjean and the saintly
      Bishop is very well known in literature.

  =deep-laid plot.=] Notice how throughout this story the different
      members of this wealthy house appear to be unable to take account
      of unselfish motives.

  =this is sheer kidnapping.=] Adhar Babu believes that Haralal has
      acquired some hypnotic influence over Venu and is trying to rob
      him of his money.

  =brokers and middlemen.=] Those who bought the grain from the peasants
      and sold it to the English firm.

  =any security.=] A money payment which would be forfeited if anything
      went wrong.

  =a note of hand.=] A paper signed by Venugopal saying that he owed so
      much money.

  =filed a suit.=] Brought an action in the law courts against the
      father to recover the money lent to the son.

  =Currency notes.=] Notes of twenty, fifty, a hundred rupees,--such as
      could be changed for money.

  =theft the night before.=] Adhar Babu had already missed the things
      that Venu had taken away.

  =it's a paying business.=] Adhar Babu imagines that Venu and Haralal
      have become partners in order to swindle other people.

  =with your connivance.=] With your secret knowledge and approval.

  =Deliverance was in the infinite sky.=] He felt that all the evils,
      which were pressing close around him, were broken through and
      that he had come out beyond them into the clear light of truth. It
      was like coming out of some narrow confined place into the open
      sky.


VI.--SUBHA

  =Subhashini.=] Sweetly speaking.

  =Sukheshini.=] With lovely hair.

  =Suhashini.=] Sweetly smiling.

  =process of translation.=] To change the unspoken language of thought
      into the spoken language of words is like translating the mother
      tongue into a foreign language. Much of the beauty is lost.

  =that speech of the dark eyes.=] Nature was speaking in every part of
      her own great being, in the same silent way as those dark eyes of
      Subha were speaking.

  =without any common language.=] The cows had the common language of
      looks with which to talk to Subha. But Pratap, who could speak,
      had not learnt Subha's language of looks.

  =they become public property.=] Everyone can amuse himself by talking
      with them in idle moments.

  =water nymph.=] Referring to the legends, common in all countries, of
      water fairies or mermaids living at the bottom of a river or
      beneath the sea and dwelling in wonderful palaces.

  =tide from the central places of the sea.=] When the moon is full, the
      tide rises to its highest point: it seems to start from some
      central place far out at sea and to come rolling and surging in.

  =silent troubled Mother.=] Nature, with her full tide and full moon,
      seems troubled and longing to break out into speech, just as Subha
      longed to do.

  =they have caught your bridegroom.=] Pratap employs the word "caught"
      from his favourite pursuit of fishing. The bridegroom has been
      caught just like a fish.

  =did her best to kill her natural beauty.=] Her hair was much more
      beautiful when left in its natural way, instead of being all bound
      up in a net.

  =The God ... the great man.=] These words refer to the bridegroom
      himself, who wields such mighty powers of choice or refusal. They
      are ironical.


VII.--THE POSTMASTER

  =like a fish out of water.=] Completely out of place, because he was
      used to city life.

  =macadamised road.=] He would have infinitely preferred the streets
      and shops and crowded markets of Calcutta.

  =smoke ... from the village cowsheds.=] Such as is used to drive away
      the mosquitoes.

  =BaA1/4l.=] A religious sect in Bengal whose members sing songs and often
      go about begging.

  =No more of this.=] He was afraid he might become too deeply attached
      to Ratan if he stayed.

  =Its fond mistakes are persistent.=] We continually try to deceive
      ourselves that what we _wish_ to be true _is_ true. When at last
      we find out the truth, we could almost wish we had not done so.


VIII.--THE CASTAWAY

  =Like a rudderless boat.=] Notice how the metaphor is kept up to the
      end of the sentence.

  =The writ of Fate.=] They said that if she was to die, she was to die,
      and nothing could prevent it.

  =profiting their Brahmin guest.=] She would believe this to be an act
      of merit for which she would be rewarded.

  =out of his repertory.=] Out of the stock of plays he recited when he
      belonged to the theatrical troupe.

  =hearing sacred names.=] This also, she believed, would bring her
      merit.

  =forcing house.=] Like some glass conservatory used for exotic
      flowers.

  =exact stature.=] The manager wished him to take the parts of women
      who are smaller than men.

  =came to adequate revelation.=] Were now abundantly apparent.

  =twice-born bird.=] Once born in the egg and once after the breaking
      of the egg. The goose in the story was the messenger between Nala
      and Damayanti.

  =the tiger has no wish to become a mouse.=] A reference to a folk
      story of a saint who turned a pet mouse into a tiger.

  =German silver.=] A kind of cheap silver containing much alloy in it.

  =to look for your Damayanti.=] To find Satish a wife.


IX.--THE SON OF RASHMANI

  =do the duty of the father.=] By disciplining and punishing the
      child.

  =crippling his patrimony.=] Injuring the estate.

  =this is preposterous.=] The natural thing would be for the property
      to be divided between the two brothers and their descendants, but
      by this will only one son was recognized and one set of grandsons.

  =given to the grandsons.=] To Shyama Charan's and Bhavani's sons.
      According to this preposterous will Bhavani was left out
      altogether, and also his son.

  =Shyama Charan's treachery.=] She fully believed that he had stolen
      the will and put this false one in its place.

  =Noto used to get reprimands.=] Used to be blamed for wishing to save
      this waste of money. Of course the whole thing was imaginary, but
      it gave Bhavani the pleased feeling of being generous.

  =traditional extravagance.=] Such as had always been displayed in
      former days when the family was prosperous.

  =Some imaginary dog.=] She would say that some dog had run off with
      the food which she had prepared.

  =Bhavani had confessed.=] Rashmani, Noto and Bhavani himself were all
      alike ready to keep up the illusion that the old magnificence was
      still there, if only this or that accident had not deprived them
      of its display.

  =invisible ink.=] Ink which is invisible when first written with, but
      when heated becomes visible.

  =Baba, wait a little.=] In Bengal daughters are often called Ma
      (mother) and sons Baba (father).

  =it became absurdly easy.=] Because, after this, both the mother and
      her son could join in the pretence together.

  =lacking in proper enthusiasm.=] Did not care much about the subject.

  =more than compensated.=] The pleasure of telling the news was greater
      than the pain of knowing that such a sacrilege was going to take
      place.

  =with all the more deadly force.=] The thrower being up above, the
      speed would increase all the more on the downward flight of the
      missile.

  =requiring expensive fodder.=] Vanity can feed itself on the idea of
      self importance.

  =to graze at large.=] Merely to feed on what is before it. He gave it
      extra food by paying for a number of flatterers, just as a horse
      is stall-fed with extra supplies of food.

  =turned round on him.=] His vanity would be offended and he would be
      his enemy instead of his helper.

  =forced extravagance.=] Kalipada had been forced by the sneers of the
      students to give far more than he could afford.

  =draw tears from the eyes.=] An amusing way of saying that no burglar
      would ever dream of trying to rob such a room.

  =laid their impious hands.=] Had grossly insulted.

  =let him climb down first.=] An English metaphor meaning "let him be
      humble."

  =he discovered the truth.=] The truth that he was a near relative of
      Kalipada.

  =grandchild's privilege.=] Especially in Bengal, a grandchild is
      allowed the liberty of making jokes with his grandfather.

  =he found it easy.=] He loved his mother so much that when he found
      anyone pleased with things which she had made he enjoyed seeing
      them use these things rather than himself.


X.--THE BABUS OF NAYANJORE

  =the days before the flood.=] The word "antediluvian" meaning "before
      the flood," is used sometimes in English for things very ancient
      and out of date. There is a play upon this here.

  =dazzling outburst.=] Just as, at a firework display, pitch darkness
      follows the last firework.

  =drawing his heavy cheques.=] To "draw a cheque" is to take so much
      from a credit account in the bank. The words are humorously used
      here of taking something from the public belief about the
      greatness of the Babus of Nayanjore.

  =and er-er.=] He hesitates a little as he mentions the ladies.

  =Thakur Dada.=] Grandfather.

  =my moral character was flawless.=] Note how the author shows the
      conceit of this young man. Compare, lower down, the phrase
      "because I was so good."

  =poet Bhabavuti.=] The poet means that there must be some one in this
      vast universe of time and space who is the match for the hero of
      his poem.

  =Chota LAct Sahib.=] The story refers to the time when Calcutta was the
      Capital of India. The Burra LAct Sahib was the Viceroy, the Chota
      LAct Sahib was the Lieutenant-Governor.

  =walking backward.=] As a mark of respect. He was continually bowing
      and then stepping back. This kind of ceremonial bowing was
      commoner in earlier days than it is now.

  =tall silk hat.=] These were only worn in India at State functions
      and their use in this country by Englishmen is becoming more and
      more rare. But in earlier days they were not uncommon. They are
      black in colour and shining.

  =ugly modern custom.=] The author dislikes the passing away of an old
      beautiful custom of reverence towards old men.

  =becoming an epic.=] Becoming legendary by its additions. An epic poem
      often goes on describing an incident with all kinds of marvellous
      events added to it, till it becomes a very long story.


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




Transcriber's Note:


The following modifications have been made to the text.

  Page 57: Raichran has been replaced with Raicharan.

  Page 86: mornng has been replaced with morning.

  Page 119: teachnig has been replaced with teaching.

  Page 166: circumstance has been replaced with circumstances.





End of Project Gutenberg's Stories from Tagore, by Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES FROM TAGORE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Stray Birds
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Stray Birds

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Illustrator: Willy Pogány

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6524]
                Most recently updated: December 29, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRAY BIRDS ***




Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred









Stray Birds


By Rabindranath Tagore


[translated from Bengali to English by the author]


New York: The Macmillan Company, 1916


[Frontispiece in color by Willy Pogány]



To
T. HARA
of
Yokohama




1
Stray birds of summer come to my window to sing and fly away.
And yellow leaves of autumn, which have no songs, flutter and
fall there with a sigh.

2
O troupe of little vagrants of the world, leave your footprints
in my words.

3
The world puts off its mask of vastness to its lover.
It becomes small as one song, as one kiss of the eternal.

4
It is the tears of the earth that keep her smiles in bloom.

5
The mighty desert is burning for the love of a blade of grass who
shakes her head and laughs and flies away.

6
If you shed tears when you miss the sun, you also miss the stars.

7
The sands in your way beg for your song and your movement,
dancing water.  Will you carry the burden of their lameness?

8
Her wistful face haunts my dreams like the rain at night.

9
Once we dreamt that we were strangers.
We wake up to find that we were dear to each other.

10
Sorrow is hushed into peace in my heart like the evening among
the silent trees.

11
Some unseen fingers, like idle breeze, are playing upon my heart
the music of the ripples.

12
"What language is thine, O sea?"

  "The language of eternal question."

"What language is thy answer, O sky?

  "The language of eternal silence."

13
Listen, my heart, to the whispers of the world with which it
makes love to you.

14
The mystery of creation is like the darkness of night--it is
great.  Delusions of knowledge are like the fog of the morning.

15
Do not seat your love upon a precipice because it is high.

16
I sit at my window this morning where the world like a passer-by
stops for a moment, nods to me and goes.

17
These little thoughts are the rustle of leaves; they have their
whisper of joy in my mind.

18
What you are you do not see, what you see is your shadow.

19
My wishes are fools, they shout across thy songs, my Master.
Let me but listen.

20
I cannot choose the best.
The best chooses me.

21
They throw their shadows before them who carry their lantern on
their back.

22
That I exist is a perpetual surprise which is life.

23
"We, the rustling leaves, have a voice that answers the storms,
but who are you so silent?"

"I am a mere flower."

24
Rest belongs to the work as the eyelids to the eyes.

25
Man is a born child, his power is the power of growth.

26
God expects answers for the flowers he sends us, not for the sun
and the earth.

27
The light that plays, like a naked child, among the green leaves
happily knows not that man can lie.

28
O Beauty, find thyself in love, not in the flattery of thy
mirror.

29
My heart beats her waves at the shore of the world and writes
upon it her signature in tears with the words, "I love thee."

30
"Moon, for what do you wait?"

"To salute the sun for whom I must make way."

31
The trees come up to my window like the yearning voice of the
dumb earth.

32
His own mornings are new surprises to God.

33
Life finds its wealth by the claims of the world, and its worth
by the claims of love.

34
The dry river-bed finds no thanks for its past.

35
The bird wishes it were a cloud.  The cloud wishes it were a
bird.

36
The waterfall sings, "I find my song, when I find my freedom."

37
I cannot tell why this heart languishes in silence.
It is for small needs it never asks, or knows or remembers.

38
Woman, when you move about in your household service your limbs
sing like a hill stream among its pebbles.

39
The sun goes to cross the Western sea, leaving its last
salutation to the East.

40
Do not blame your food because you have no appetite.

41
The trees, like the longings of the earth, stand a-tiptoe to peep
at the heaven.

42
You smiled and talked to me of nothing and I felt that for this I
had been waiting long.

43
The fish in the water is silent, the animal on the earth is
noisy, the bird in the air is singing,
But Man has in him the silence of the sea, the noise of the earth
and the music of the air.

44
The world rushes on over the strings of the lingering heart
making the music of sadness.

45
He has made his weapons his gods.  When his weapons win he is
defeated himself.

46
God finds himself by creating.

47
Shadow, with her veil drawn, follows Light in secret meekness,
with her silent steps of love.

48
The stars are not afraid to appear like fireflies.

49
I thank thee that I am none of the wheels of power but I am one
with the living creatures that are crushed by it.

50
The mind, sharp but not broad, sticks at every point but does not
move.

51
Your idol is shattered in the dust to prove that God's dust is
greater than your idol.

52
Man does not reveal himself in his history, he struggles up
through it.

53
While the glass lamp rebukes the earthen for calling it cousin,
the moon rises, and the glass lamp, with a bland smile, calls
her, "My dear, dear sister."

54
Like the meeting of the seagulls and the waves we meet and come
near.  The seagulls fly off, the waves roll away and we depart.

55
My day is done, and I am like a boat drawn on the beach,
listening to the dance-music of the tide in the evening.

56
Life is given to us, we earn it by giving it.

57
We come nearest to the great when we are great in humility.

58
The sparrow is sorry for the peacock at the burden of its tail.

59
Never be afraid of the moments--thus sings the voice of the
everlasting.

60
The hurricane seeks the shortest road by the no-road, and
suddenly ends its search in the Nowhere.

61
Take my wine in my own cup, friend.
It loses its wreath of foam when poured into that of others.

62
The Perfect decks itself in beauty for the love of the Imperfect.

63
God says to man, "I heal you therefore I hurt, love you therefore
punish."

64
Thank the flame for its light, but do not forget the lampholder
standing in the shade with constancy of patience.

65
Tiny grass, your steps are small, but you possess the earth under
your tread.

66
The infant flower opens its bud and cries, "Dear World, please do
not fade."

67
God grows weary of great kingdoms, but never of little flowers.

68
Wrong cannot afford defeat but Right can.

69
"I give my whole water in joy," sings the waterfall, "though
little of it is enough for the thirsty."

70
Where is the fountain that throws up these flowers in a ceaseless
outbreak of ecstasy?

71
The woodcutter's axe begged for its handle from the tree.
The tree gave it.

72
In my solitude of heart I feel the sigh of this widowed evening
veiled with mist and rain.

73
Chastity is a wealth that comes from abundance of love.

74
The mist, like love, plays upon the heart of the hills and brings
out surprises of beauty.

75
We read the world wrong and say that it deceives us.

76
The poet wind is out over the sea and the forest to seek his own
voice.

77
Every child comes with the message that God is not yet
discouraged of man.

78
The grass seeks her crowd in the earth.
The tree seeks his solitude of the sky.

79
Man barricades against himself.

80
Your voice, my friend, wanders in my heart, like the muffled
sound of the sea among these listening pines.

81
What is this unseen flame of darkness whose sparks are the stars?

82
Let life be beautiful like summer flowers and death like autumn
leaves.

83
He who wants to do good knocks at the gate; he who loves finds
the gate open.

84
In death the many becomes one; in life the one becomes many.
Religion will be one when God is dead.

85
The artist is the lover of Nature, therefore he is her slave and
her master.

86
"How far are you from me, O Fruit?"

"I am hidden in your heart, O Flower."

87
This longing is for the one who is felt in the dark, but not seen
in the day.

88
"You are the big drop of dew under the lotus leaf, I am the
smaller one on its upper side," said the dewdrop to the lake.

89
The scabbard is content to be dull when it protects the keenness
of the sword.

90
In darkness the One appears as uniform; in the light the One
appears as manifold.

91
The great earth makes herself hospitable with the help of the
grass.

92
The birth and death of the leaves are the rapid whirls of the
eddy whose wider circles move slowly among stars.

93
  Power said to the world, "You are mine.
  The world kept it prisoner on her throne.
  Love said to the world, "I am thine."
  The world gave it the freedom of her house.

94
The mist is like the earth's desire.  It hides the sun for whom
she cries.

95
Be still, my heart, these great trees are prayers.

96
The noise of the moment scoffs at the music of the Eternal.

97
I think of other ages that floated upon the stream of life and
love and death and are forgotten, and I feel the freedom of
passing away.

98
The sadness of my soul is her bride's veil.
It waits to be lifted in the night.

99
Death's stamp gives value to the coin of life; making it possible
to buy with life what is truly precious.

100
The cloud stood humbly in a corner of the sky.
The morning crowned it with splendour.

101
The dust receives insult and in return offers her flowers.

102
Do not linger to gather flowers to keep them, but walk on, for
flowers will keep themselves blooming all your way.

103
Roots are the branches down in the earth.
Branches are roots in the air.

104
The music of the far-away summer flutters around the Autumn
seeking its former nest.

105
Do not insult your friend by lending him merits from your own
pocket.

106
The touch of the nameless days clings to my heart like mosses
round the old tree.

107
The echo mocks her origin to prove she is the original.

108
God is ashamed when the prosperous boasts of His special favour.

109
I cast my own shadow upon my path, because I have a lamp that has
not been lighted.

110
Man goes into the noisy crowd to drown his own clamour of
silence.

111
That which ends in exhaustion is death, but the perfect ending is
in the endless.

112
The sun has his simple robe of light.  The clouds are decked with
gorgeousness.

113
The hills are like shouts of children who raise their arms,
trying to catch stars.

114
The road is lonely in its crowd for it is not loved.

115
The power that boasts of its mischiefs is laughed at by the
yellow leaves that fall, and clouds that pass by.

116
The earth hums to me to-day in the sun, like a woman at her
spinng, some ballad of the ancient time in a forgotten tongue.

117
The grass-blade is worth of the great world where it grows.

118
Dream is a wife who must talk.
Sleep is a husband who silently suffers.

119
The night kisses the fading day whispering to his ear, "I am
death, your mother.  I am to give you fresh birth."

120
I feel, thy beauty, dark night, like that of the loved woman when
she has put out the lamp.

121
I carry in my world that flourishes the worlds that have failed.

122
Dear friend, I feel the silence of your great thoughts of may a
deepening eventide on this beach when I listen to these waves.

123
The bird thinks it is an act of kindness to give the fish a lift
in the air.

124
"In the moon thou sendest thy love letters to me," said the night
to the sun.

"I leave my answers in tears upon the grass."

125
The Great is a born child; when he dies he gives his great
childhood to the world.

126
Not hammerstrokes, but dance of the water sings the pebbles into
perfection.

127
Bees sip honey from flowers and hum their thanks when they leave.
The gaudy butterfly is sure that the flowers owe thanks to him.

128
To be outspoken is easy when you do not wait to speak the
complete truth.

129
Asks the Possible to the Impossible, "Where is your dwelling
place?"

"In the dreams of the impotent," comes the answer.

130
If you shut your door to all errors truth will be shut out.

131
I hear some rustle of things behind my sadness of heart,--I
cannot see them.

132
Leisure in its activity is work.
The stillness of the sea stirs in waves.

133
The leaf becomes flower when it loves.
The flower becomes fruit when it worships.

134
The roots below the earth claim no rewards for making the
branches fruitful.

135
This rainy evening the wind is restless.
I look at the swaying branches and ponder over the greatness of
all things.

136
Storm of midnight, like a giant child awakened in the untimely
dark, has begun to play and shout.

137
Thou raisest thy waves vainly to follow thy lover.  O sea, thou
lonely bride of the storm.

138
"I am ashamed of my emptiness," said the Word to the Work.
"I know how poor I am when I see you," said the Work to the Word.

139
Time is the wealth of change, but the clock in its parody makes
it mere change and no wealth.

140
Truth in her dress finds facts too tight.
In fiction she moves with ease.

141
When I travelled to here and to there, I was tired of thee, O
Road, but now when thou leadest me to everywhere I am wedded to
thee in love.

142
Let me think that there is one among those stars that guides my
life through the dark unknown.

143
Woman, with the grace of your fingers you touched my things and
order came out like music.

144
One sad voice has its nest among the ruins of the years.
It sings to me in the night,--"I loved you."

145
The flaming fire warns me off by its own glow.
Save me from the dying embers hidden under ashes.

146
I have my stars in the sky,
But oh for my little lamp unlit in my house.

147
The dust of the dead words clings to thee.
Wash thy soul with silence.

148
Gaps are left in life through which comes the sad music of death.

149
The world has opened its heart of light in the morning.
Come out, my heart, with thy love to meet it.

150
My thoughts shimmer with these shimmering leaves and my heart
sings with the touch of this sunlight; my life is glad to be
floating with all things into the blue of space, into the dark of
time.

151
God's great power is in the gentle breeze, not in the storm.

152
This is a dream in which things are all loose and they oppress.
I shall find them gathered in thee when I awake and shall be
free.

153
"Who is there to take up my duties?"  asked the setting sun.

"I shall do what I can, my Master," said the earthen lamp.

154
By plucking her petals you do not gather the beauty of the
flower.

155
Silence will carry your voice like the nest that holds the
sleeping birds.

156
The Great walks with the Small without fear.
The Middling keeps aloof.

157
The night opens the flowers in secret and allows the day to get
thanks.

158
Power takes as ingratitude the writhings of its victims.

159
When we rejoice in our fulness, then we can part with our fruits
with joy.

160
The raindrops kissed the earth and whispered,--"We are thy
homesick children, mother, come back to thee from the heaven."

161
The cobweb pretends to catch dew-drops and catches flies.

162
Love!  when you come with the burning lamp of pain in your hand,
I can see your face and know you as bliss.

163
"The learned say that your lights will one day be no more."  said
the firefly to the stars.

The stars made no answer.

164
In the dusk of the evening the bird of some early dawn comes to
the nest of my silence.

165
Thoughts pass in my mind like flocks of ducks in the sky.
I hear the voice of their wings.

166
The canal loves to think that rivers exist solely to supply it
with water.

167
The world has kissed my soul with its pain, asking for its return
in songs.

168
That which oppresses me, is it my soul trying to come out in the
open, or the soul of the world knocking at my heart for its
entrance?

169
Thought feeds itself with its own words and grows.

170
I have dipped the vessel of my heart into this silent hour; it
has filled with love.

171
Either you have work or you have not.
When you have to say, "Let us do something," then begins
mischief.

172
The sunflower blushed to own the nameless flower as her kin.
The sun rose and smiled on it, saying, "Are you well, my
darling?"

173
"Who drives me forward like fate?"

"The Myself striding on my back."

174
The clouds fill the watercups of the river, hiding themselves in
the distant hills.

175
I spill water from my water jar as I walk on my way,
Very little remains for my home.

176
The water in a vessel is sparkling; the water in the sea is dark.
The small truth has words that are clear; the great truth has
great silence.

177
Your smile was the flowers of your own fields, your talk was the
rustle of your own mountain pines, but your heart was the woman
that we all know.

178
It is the little things that I leave behind for my loved ones,--
great things are for everyone.

179
Woman, thou hast encircled the world's heart with the depth of
thy tears as the sea has the earth.

180
The sunshine greets me with a smile.  The rain, his sad sister,
talks to my heart.

181
My flower of the day dropped its petals forgotten.
In the evening it ripens into a golden fruit of memory.

182
I am like the road in the night listening to the footfalls of its
memories in silence.

183
The evening sky to me is like a window, and a lighted lamp, and a
waiting behind it.

184
He who is too busy doing good finds no time to be good.

185
I am the autumn cloud, empty of rain, see my fulness in the field
of ripened rice.

186
They hated and killed and men praised them.
But God in shame hastens to hide its memory under the green
grass.

187
Toes are the fingers that have forsaken their past.

188
Darkness travels towards light, but blindness towards death.

189
The pet dog suspects the universe for scheming to take its place.

190
Sit still my heart, do not raise your dust.
Let the world find its way to you.

191
The bow whispers to the arrow before it speeds forth--"Your
freedom is mine."

192
Woman, in your laughter you have the music of the fountain of
life.

193
A mind all logic is like a knife all blade.
It makes the hand bleed that uses it.

194
God loves man's lamp lights better than his own great stars.

195
This world is the world of wild storms kept tame with the music
of beauty.

196
"My heart is like the golden casket of thy kiss," said the sunset
cloud to the sun.

197
By touching you may kill, by keeping away you may possess.

198
The cricket's chirp and the patter of rain come to me through the
dark, like the rustle of dreams from my past youth.

199
"I have lost my dewdrop," cries the flower to the morning sky
that has lost all its stars.

200
The burning log bursts in flame and cries,--"This is my flower,
my death."

201
The wasp thinks that the honey-hive of the neighbouring bees is
too small.
His neighbours ask him to build one still smaller.

202
"I cannot keep your waves," says the bank to the river.

"Let me keep your footprints in my heart."

203
The day, with the noise of this little earth, drowns the silence
of all worlds.

204
The song feels the infinite in the air, the picture in the earth,
the poem in the air and the earth;
For its words have meaning that walks and music that soars.

205
When the sun goes down to the West, the East of his morning
stands before him in silence.

206
Let me not put myself wrongly to my world and set it against me.

207
Praise shames me, for I secretly beg for it.

208
Let my doing nothing when I have nothing to do become untroubled
in its depth of peace like the evening in the seashore when the
water is silent.

209
Maiden, your simplicity, like the blueness of the lake, reveals
your depth of truth.

210
The best does not come alone.  It comes with the company of the
all.

211
God's right hand is gentle, but terrible is his left hand.

212
My evening came among the alien trees and spoke in a language
which my morning stars did not know.

213
Night's darkness is a bag that bursts with the gold of the dawn.

214
Our desire lends the colours of the rainbow to the mere mists and
vapours of life.

215
God waits to win back his own flowers as gifts from man's hands.

216
My sad thoughts tease me asking me their own names.

217
The service of the fruit is precious, the service of the flower
is sweet, but let my service be the service of the leaves in its
shade of humble devotion.

218
My heart has spread its sails to the idle winds for the shadowy
island of Anywhere.

219
Men are cruel, but Man is kind.

220
Make me thy cup and let my fulness be for thee and for thine.

221
The storm is like the cry of some god in pain whose love the
earth refuses.

222
The world does not leak because death is not a crack.

223
Life has become richer by the love that has been lost.

224
My friend, your great heart shone with the sunrise of the East
like the snowy summit of a lonely hill in the dawn.

225
The fountain of death makes the still water of life play.

226
Those who have everything but thee, my God, laugh at those who
have nothing but thyself.

227
The movement of life has its rest in its own music.

228
Kicks only raise dust and not crops from the earth.

229
Our names are the light that glows on the sea waves at night and
then dies without leaving its signature.

230
Let him only see the thorns who has eyes to see the rose.

231
Set bird's wings with gold and it will never again soar in the
sky.

232
The same lotus of our clime blooms here in the alien water with
the same sweetness, under another name.

233
In heart's perspective the distance looms large.

234
The moon has her light all over the sky, her dark spots to
herself.

235
Do not say, "It is morning," and dismiss it with a name of
yesterday.  See it for the first time as a new-born child that
has no name.

236
Smoke boasts to the sky, and Ashes to the earth, that they are
brothers to the fire.

237
The raindrop whispered to the jasmine, "Keep me in your heart for
ever."

The jasmine sighed, "Alas," and dropped to the ground.

238
Timid thoughts, do not be afraid of me.
I am a poet.

239
The dim silence of my mind seems filled with crickets' chirp--the
grey twilight of sound.

240
Rockets, your insult to the stars follows yourself back to the
earth.

241
Thou hast led me through my crowded travels of the day to my
evening's loneliness.
I wait for its meaning through the stillness of the night.

242
This life is the crossing of a sea, where we meet in the same
narrow ship.
In death we reach the shore and go to our different worlds.

243
The stream of truth flows through its channels of mistakes.

244
My heart is homesick to-day for the one sweet hour across the sea
of time.

245
The bird-song is the echo of the morning light back from the
earth.

246
"Are you too proud to kiss me?"  the morning light asks the
buttercup.

247
"How may I sing to thee and worship, O Sun?"  asked the little
flower.

"By the simple silence of thy purity," answered the sun.

248
Man is worse than an animal when he is an animal.

249
Dark clouds become heaven's flowers when kissed by light.

250
Let not the sword-blade mock its handle for being blunt.

251
The night's silence, like a deep lamp, is burning with the light
of its milky way.

252
Around the sunny island of Life swells day and night death's
limitless song of the sea.

253
Is not this mountain like a flower, with its petals of hills,
drinking the sunlight?

254
The real with its meaning read wrong and emphasis misplaced is
the unreal.

255
Find your beauty, my heart, from the world's movement, like the
boat that has the grace of the wind and the water.

256
The eyes are not proud of their sight but of their eyeglasses.

257
I live in this little world of mine and am afraid to make it the
least less.  Lift me into thy world and let me have the freedom
gladly to lose my all.

258
The false can never grow into truth by growing in power.

259
My heart, with its lapping waves of song, longs to caress this
green world of the sunny day.

260
Wayside grass, love the star, then your dreams will come out in
flowers.

261
Let your music, like a sword, pierce the noise of the market to
its heart.

262
The trembling leaves of this tree touch my heart like the fingers
of an infant child.

263
This sadness of my soul is her bride's veil.
It waits to be lifted in the night.

264
The little flower lies in the dust.
It sought the path of the butterfly.

265
I am in the world of the roads.  The night comes.  Open thy gate,
thou world of the home.

266
I have sung the songs of thy day.  In the evening let me carry
thy lamp through the stormy path.

267
I do not ask thee into the house.
Come into my infinite loneliness, my Lover.

268
Death belongs to life as birth does.  The walk is in the raising
of the foot as in the laying of it down.

269
I have learnt the simple meaning of thy whispers in flowers and
sunshine--teach me to know thy words in pain and death.

270
The night's flower was late when the morning kissed her, she
shivered and sighed and dropped to the ground.

271
Through the sadness of all things I hear the crooning of the
Eternal Mother.

272
I came to your shore as a stranger, I lived in your house as a
guest, I leave your door as a friend, my earth.

273
Let my thoughts come to you, when I am gone, like the afterglow
of sunset at the margin of starry silence.

274
Light in my heart the evening star of rest and then let the night
whisper to me of love.

275
I am a child in the dark.
I stretch my hands through the coverlet of night for thee,
Mother.

276
The day of work is done.  Hide my face in your arms, Mother.
Let me dream.

277
The lamp of meeting burns long; it goes out in a moment at the
parting.

278
One word keep for me in thy silence, O World, when I am dead, "I
have loved."

279
We live in this world when we love it.

280
Let the dead have the immortality of fame, but the living the
immortality of love.

281
I have seen thee as the half-awakened child sees his mother in
the dusk of the dawn and then smiles and sleeps again.

282
I shall die again and again to know that life is inexhaustible.

283
While I was passing with the crowd in the road I saw thy smile
from the balcony and I sang and forgot all noise.

284
Love is life in its fulness like the cup with its wine.

285
They light their own lamps and sing their own words in their
temples.
But the birds sing thy name in thine own morning light,--for thy
name is joy.

286
Lead me in the centre of thy silence to fill my heart with songs.

287
Let them live who choose in their own hissing world of fireworks.
My heart longs for thy stars, my God.

288
Love's pain sang round my life like the unplumbed sea, and love's
joy sang like birds in its flowering groves.

289
Put out the lamp when thou wishest.
I shall know thy darkness and shall love it.

290
When I stand before thee at the day's end thou shalt see my scars
and know that I had my wounds and also my healing.

291
Some day I shall sing to thee in the sunrise of some other world,
"I have seen thee before in the light of the earth, in the love
of man."

292
Clouds come floating into my life from other days no longer to
shed rain or usher storm but to give colour to my sunset sky.

293
Truth raises against itself the storm that scatters its seeds
broadcast.

294
The storm of the last night has crowned this morning with golden
peace.

295
Truth seems to come with its final word; and the final word gives
birth to its next.

296
Blessed is he whose fame does not outshine his truth.

297
Sweetness of thy name fills my heart when I forget mine--like thy
morning sun when the mist is melted.

298
The silent night has the beauty of the mother and the clamorous
day of the child.

299
The world loved man when he smiled.  The world became afraid of
him when he laughed.

300
God waits for man to regain his childhood in wisdom.

301
Let me feel this world as thy love taking form, then my love will
help it.

302
Thy sunshine smiles upon the winter days of my heart, never
doubting of its spring flowers.

303
God kisses the finite in his love and man the infinite.

304
Thou crossest desert lands of barren years to reach the moment of
fulfilment.

305
God's silence ripens man's thoughts into speech.

306
Thou wilt find, Eternal Traveller, marks of thy footsteps across
my songs.

307
Let me not shame thee, Father, who displayest thy glory in thy
children.

308
Cheerless is the day, the light under frowning clouds is like a
punished child with traces of tears on its pale cheeks, and the
cry of the wind is like the cry of a wounded world.  But I know I
am travelling to meet my Friend.

309
To-night there is a stir among the palm leaves, a swell in the
sea, Full Moon, like the heart throb of the world.  From what
unknown sky hast thou carried in thy silence the aching secret of
love?

310
I dream of a star, an island of light, where I shall be born and
in the depth of its quickening leisure my life will ripen its
works like the ricefield in the autumn sun.

311
The smell of the wet earth in the rain rises like a great chant
of praise from the voiceless multitude of the insignificant.

312
That love can ever lose is a fact that we cannot accept as truth.

313
We shall know some day that death can never rob us of that which
our soul has gained, for her gains are one with herself.

314
God comes to me in the dusk of my evening with the flowers from
my past kept fresh in his basket.

315
When all the strings of my life will be tuned, my Master, then at
every touch of thine will come out the music of love.

316
Let me live truly, my Lord, so that death to me become true.

317
Man's history is waiting in patience for the triumph of the
insulted man.

318
I feel thy gaze upon my heart this moment like the sunny silence
of the morning upon the lonely field whose harvest is over.

319
I long for the Island of Songs across this heaving Sea of Shouts.

320
The prelude of the night is commenced in the music of the sunset,
in its solemn hymn to the ineffable dark.

321
I have scaled the peak and found no shelter in fame's bleak and
barren height.  Lead me, my Guide, before the light fades, into
the valley of quiet where life's harvest mellows into golden
wisdom.

322
Things look phantastic in this dimness of the dusk--the spires
whose bases are lost in the dark and tree tops like blots of ink.
I shall wait for the morning and wake up to see thy city in the
light.

323
I have suffered and despaired and known death and I am glad that
I am in this great world.

324
There are tracts in my life that are bare and silent.  They are
the open spaces where my busy days had their light and air.

325
Release me from my unfulfilled past clinging to me from behind
making death difficult.

326
Let this be my last word, that I trust in thy love.












*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRAY BIRDS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The gardener
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The gardener

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: October 1, 2004 [eBook #6686]
                Most recently updated: March 30, 2013

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chetan Jain, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GARDENER ***




Produced by Chetan Jain






THE GARDENER

By Rabindranath Tagore

Translated by the author from the original Bengali

1915


[Frontispiece: Rabindranath Tagore. Age 16--see tagore.jpg]


To W. B. Yeats



Thanks are due to the editor of _Poetry, a Magazine of Verse_, for
permission to reprint eight poems in this volume.




Preface


Most of the lyrics of love and life, the translations of which from
Bengali are published in this book, were written much earlier than the
series of religious poems contained in the book named _Gitanjali_. The
translations are not always literal--the originals being sometimes
abridged and sometimes paraphrased.

Rabindranath Tagore.



 1


 SERVANT.  Have mercy upon your servant, my queen!

 QUEEN.  The assembly is over and my servants are all gone.  Why
   do you come at this late hour?

 SERVANT.  When you have finished with others, that is my time.
 I come to ask what remains for your last servant to do.

 QUEEN.  What can you expect when it is too late?

 SERVANT.  Make me the gardener of your flower garden.

 QUEEN.  What folly is this?

 SERVANT.  I will give up my other work.
 I will throw my swords and lances down in the dust.  Do not send
   me to distant courts; do not bid me undertake new conquests.
   But make me the gardener of your flower garden.

 QUEEN.  What will your duties be?

 SERVANT.  The service of your idle days.
 I will keep fresh the grassy path where you walk in the morning,
   where your feet will be greeted with praise at every step by
   the flowers eager for death.
 I will swing you in a swing among the branches of the
   _saptaparna_, where the early evening moon will struggle
   to kiss your skirt through the leaves.
 I will replenish with scented oil the lamp that burns by your
   bedside, and decorate your footstool with sandal and saffron
   paste in wondrous designs.

 QUEEN.  What will you have for your reward?

 SERVANT.  To be allowed to hold your little fists like tender
   lotus-buds and slip flower chains over your wrists; to tinge
   the soles of your feet with the red juice of _ashoka_
   petals and kiss away the speck of dust that may chance to
   linger there.

 QUEEN.  Your prayers are granted, my servant, you will be the
   gardener of my flower garden.



 2


 "Ah, poet, the evening draws near; your hair is turning grey.
 "Do you in your lonely musing hear the message of the hereafter?"

 "It is evening," the poet said, "and I am listening because some
   one may call from the village, late though it be.
 "I watch if young straying hearts meet together, and two pairs of
   eager eyes beg for music to break their silence and speak for
   them.
 "Who is there to weave their passionate songs, if I sit on the
   shore of life and contemplate death and the beyond?

 "The early evening star disappears.
 "The glow of a funeral pyre slowly dies by the silent river.
 "Jackals cry in chorus from the courtyard of the deserted house
   in the light of the worn-out moon.
 "If some wanderer, leaving home, come here to watch the night and
   with bowed head listen to the murmur of the darkness, who is
   there to whisper the secrets of life into his ears if I,
   shutting my doors, should try to free myself from mortal bonds?

 "It is a trifle that my hair is turning grey.
 "I am ever as young or as old as the youngest and the oldest of
   this village.
 "Some have smiles, sweet and simple, and some a sly twinkle in
   their eyes.
 "Some have tears that well up in the daylight, and others tears
   that are hidden in the gloom.
 They all have need for me, and I have no time to brood over the
   afterlife.
 "I am of an age with each, what matter if my hair turns grey?"



 3


 In the morning I cast my net into the sea.
 I dragged up from the dark abyss things of strange aspect and
   strange beauty--some shone like a smile, some glistened like
   tears, and some were flushed like the cheeks of a bride.
 When with the day's burden I went home, my love was sitting in
   the garden idly tearing the leaves of a flower.
 I hesitated for a moment, and then placed at her feet all that I
   had dragged up, and stood silent.
 She glanced at them and said, "What strange things are these?  I
   know not of what use they are!"
 I bowed my head in shame and thought, "I have not fought for
   these, I did not buy them in the market; they are not fit gifts
   for her."
 Then the whole night through I flung them one by one into the
   street.
 In the morning travellers came; they picked them up and carried
   them into far countries.



 4


 Ah me, why did they build my house by the road to the market
   town?
 They moor their laden boats near my trees.
 They come and go and wander at their will.
 I sit and watch them; my time wears on.
 Turn them away I cannot.  And thus my days pass by.

 Night and day their steps sound by my door.
 Vainly I cry, "I do not know you."
 Some of them are known to my fingers, some to my nostrils, the
   blood in my veins seems to know them, and some are known to my
   dreams.
 Turn them away I cannot.  I call them and say, "Come to my house
   whoever chooses.  Yes, come."

 In the morning the bell rings in the temple.
 They come with their baskets in their hands.
 Their feet are rosy red.  The early light of dawn is on their
   faces.
 Turn them away I cannot.  I call them and I say, "Come to my
   garden to gather flowers.  Come hither."

 In the mid-day the gong sounds at the palace gate.
 I know not why they leave their work and linger near my hedge.
 The flowers in their hair are pale and faded; the notes are
   languid in their flutes.
 Turn them away I cannot.  I call them and say, "The shade is cool
   under my trees.  Come, friends."

 At night the crickets chirp in the woods.
 Who is it that comes slowly to my door and gently knocks?
 I vaguely see the face, not a word is spoken, the stillness of
   the sky is all around.
 Turn away my silent guest I cannot.  I look at the face through
   the dark, and hours of dreams pass by.



 5


 I am restless.  I am athirst for far-away things.
 My soul goes out in a longing to touch the skirt of the dim
   distance.
 O Great Beyond, O the keen call of thy flute!
 I forget, I ever forget, that I have no wings to fly, that I am
   bound in this spot evermore.

 I am eager and wakeful, I am a stranger in a strange land.
 Thy breath comes to me whispering an impossible hope.
 Thy tongue is known to my heart as its very own.
 O Far-to-seek, O the keen call of thy flute!
 I forget, I ever forget, that I know not the way, that I have not
   the winged horse.

 I am listless, I am a wanderer in my heart.
 In the sunny haze of the languid hours, what vast vision of thine
   takes shape in the blue of the sky!
 O Farthest end, O the keen call of thy flute!
 I forget, I ever forget, that the gates are shut everywhere in
   the house where I dwell alone!



 6


 The tame bird was in a cage, the free bird was in the forest.
 They met when the time came, it was a decree of fate.
 The free bird cries, "O my love, let us fly to wood."
 The cage bird whispers, "Come hither, let us both live in the
   cage."
 Says the free bird, "Among bars, where is there room to spread
   one's wings?"
 "Alas," cries the cage bird, "I should not know where to sit
   perched in the sky."

 The free bird cries, "My darling, sing the songs of the
   woodlands."
 The cage bird says, "Sit by my side, I'll teach you the speech of
   the learned."
 The forest bird cries, "No, ah no! songs can never be taught."
 The cage bird says, "Alas for me, I know not the songs of the
   woodlands."

 Their love is intense with longing, but they never can fly wing
   to wing.
 Through the bars of the cage they look, and vain is their wish to
   know each other.
 They flutter their wings in yearning, and sing, "Come closer, my
   love!"
 The free bird cries, "It cannot be, I fear the closed doors of
   the cage."
 The cage bird whispers, "Alas, my wings are powerless and dead."



 7


 O mother, the young Prince is to pass by our door,--how can I
   attend to my work this morning?
 Show me how to braid up my hair; tell me what garment to put on.
 Why do you look at me amazed, mother?
 I know well he will not glance up once at my window; I know he
   will pass out of my sight in the twinkling of an eye; only the
   vanishing strain of the flute will come sobbing to me from
   afar.
 But the young Prince will pass by our door, and I will put on my
   best for the moment.

 O mother, the young Prince did pass by our door, and the morning
   sun flashed from his chariot.
 I swept aside the veil from my face, I tore the ruby chain from
   my neck and flung it in his path.
 Why do you look at me amazed, mother?
 I know well he did not pick up my chain; I know it was crushed
   under his wheels leaving a red stain upon the dust, and no one
   knows what my gift was nor to whom.
 But the young Prince did pass by our door, and I flung the jewel
   from my breast before his path.



 8


 When the lamp went out by my bed I woke up with the early birds.
 I sat at my open window with a fresh wreath on my loose hair.
 The young traveller came along the road in the rosy mist of the
   morning.
 A pearl chain was on his neck, and the sun's rays fell on his
   crown.  He stopped before my door and asked me with an eager
   cry, "Where is she?"
 For very shame I could not say, "She is I, young traveller, she
   is I."

 It was dusk and the lamp was not lit.
 I was listlessly braiding my hair.
 The young traveller came on his chariot in the glow of the
   setting sun.
 His horses were foaming at the mouth, and there was dust on his
   garment.
 He alighted at my door and asked in a tired voice, "Where is
   she?"
 For very shame I could not say, "She is I, weary traveller, she
   is I."

 It is an April night.  The lamp is burning in my room.
 The breeze of the south comes gently.  The noisy parrot sleeps in
   its cage.
 My bodice is of the colour of the peacock's throat, and my mantle
   is green as young grass.
 I sit upon the floor at the window watching the deserted street.
 Through the dark night I keep humming, "She is I, despairing
   traveller, she is I."



 9


 When I go alone at night to my love-tryst, birds do not sing, the
   wind does not stir, the houses on both sides of the street
   stand silent.
 It is my own anklets that grow loud at every step and I am
   ashamed.

 When I sit on my balcony and listen for his footsteps, leaves do
   not rustle on the trees, and the water is still in the river
   like the sword on the knees of a sentry fallen asleep.
 It is my own heart that beats wildly--I do not know how to quiet
   it.

 When my love comes and sits by my side, when my body trembles and
   my eyelids droop, the night darkens, the wind blows out the
   lamp, and the clouds draw veils over the stars.
 It is the jewel at my own breast that shines and gives light.  I
   do not know how to hide it.



 10


 Let your work be, bride.  Listen, the guest has come.
 Do you hear, he is gently shaking the chain which fastens the
   door?
 See that your anklets make no loud noise, and that your step is
   not over-hurried at meeting him.
 Let your work be, bride, the guest has come in the evening.

 No, it is not the ghostly wind, bride, do not be frightened.
 It is the full moon on a night of April; shadows are pale in the
   courtyard; the sky overhead is bright.
 Draw your veil over your face if you must, carry the lamp to the
   door if you fear.
 No, it is not the ghostly wind, bride, do not be frightened.

 Have no word with him if you are shy; stand aside by the door
   when you meet him.
 If he asks you questions, and if you wish to, you can lower your
   eyes in silence.
 Do not let your bracelets jingle when, lamp in hand, you lead him
   in.
 Have no word with him if you are shy.

 Have you not finished your work yet, bride?  Listen, the guest
   has come.
 Have you not lit the lamp in the cowshed?
 Have you not got ready the offering basket for the evening
   service?
 Have you not put the red lucky mark at the parting of your hair,
   and done your toilet for the night?
 O bride, do you hear, the guest has come?
 Let your work be!



 11


 Come as you are; do not loiter over your toilet.
 If your braided hair has loosened, if the parting of your hair be
   not straight, if the ribbons of your bodice be not fastened, do
   not mind.
 Come as you are; do not loiter over your toilet.

 Come, with quick steps over the grass.
 If the raddle come from your feet because of the dew, if the
   rings of bells upon your feet slacken, if pearls drop out of
   your chain, do not mind.
 Come with quick steps over the grass.

 Do you see the clouds wrapping the sky?
 Flocks of cranes fly up from the further river-bank and fitful
   gusts of wind rush over the heath.
 The anxious cattle run to their stalls in the village.
 Do you see the clouds wrapping the sky?

 In vain you light your toilet lamp--it flickers and goes out in
   the wind.
 Who can know that your eyelids have not been touched with lamp-
   black?  For your eyes are darker than rain-clouds.
 In vain you light your toilet lamp--it goes out.

 Come as you are; do not loiter over your toilet.
 If the wreath is not woven, who cares; if the wrist-chain has not
   been linked, let it be.
 The sky is overcast with clouds--it is late.
 Come as you are; do not loiter over your toilet.



 12


 If you would be busy and fill your pitcher, come, O come to my
   lake.
 The water will cling round your feet and babble its secret.
 The shadow of the coming rain is on the sands, and the clouds
   hang low upon the blue lines of the trees like the heavy hair
   above your eyebrows.
 I know well the rhythm of your steps, they are beating in my
   heart.
 Come, O come to my lake, if you must fill your pitcher.

 If you would be idle and sit listless and let your pitcher float
   on the water, come, O come to my lake.
 The grassy slope is green, and the wild flowers beyond number.
 Your thoughts will stray out of your dark eyes like birds from
   their nests.
 Your veil will drop to your feet.
 Come, O come to my lake if you must sit idle.

 If you would leave off your play and dive in the water, come, O
   come to my lake.
 Let your blue mantle lie on the shore; the blue water will cover
   you and hide you.
 The waves will stand a-tiptoe to kiss your neck and whisper in
   your ears.
 Come, O come to my lake, if you would dive in the water.

 If you must be mad and leap to your death, come, O come to my
   lake.
 It is cool and fathomlessly deep.
 It is dark like a sleep that is dreamless.
 There in its depths nights and days are one, and songs are
   silence.
 Come, O come to my lake, if you would plunge to your death.



 13


 I asked nothing, only stood at the edge of the wood behind the
   tree.
 Languor was still upon the eyes of the dawn, and the dew in the
   air.
 The lazy smell of the damp grass hung in the thin mist above the
   earth.
 Under the banyan tree you were milking the cow with your hands,
   tender and fresh as butter.
 And I was standing still.

 I did not say a word.  It was the bird that sang unseen from the
   thicket.
 The mango tree was shedding its flowers upon the village road,
   and the bees came humming one by one.
 On the side of the pond the gate of _Shiva's_ temple was
   opened and the worshipper had begun his chants.
 With the vessel on your lap you were milking the cow.
 I stood with my empty can.

 I did not come near you.
 The sky woke with the sound of the gong at the temple.
 The dust was raised in the road from the hoofs of the driven
   cattle.
 With the gurgling pitchers at their hips, women came from the
   river.
 Your bracelets were jingling, and foam brimming over the jar.
 The morning wore on and I did not come near you.



 14


 I was walking by the road, I do not know why, when the noonday
   was past and bamboo branches rustled in the wind.
 The prone shadows with their out-stretched arms clung to the feet
   of the hurrying light.
 The _koels_ were weary of their songs.
 I was walking by the road, I do not know why.

 The hut by the side of the water is shaded by an overhanging
   tree.
 Some one was busy with her work, and her bangles made music in
   the corner.
 I stood before this hut, I know not why.

 The narrow winding road crosses many a mustard field, and many a
   mango forest.
 It passes by the temple of the village and the market at the
   river landing place.
 I stopped by this hut, I do not know why.

 Years ago it was a day of breezy March when the murmur of the
   spring was languorous, and mango blossoms were dropping on the
   dust.
 The rippling water leapt and licked the brass vessel that stood
   on the landing step.
 I think of that day of breezy March, I do not know why.

 Shadows are deepening and cattle returning to their folds.
 The light is grey upon the lonely meadows, and the villagers are
   waiting for the ferry at the bank.
 I slowly return upon my steps, I do not know why.



 15


 I run as a musk-deer runs in the shadow of the forest mad with
   his own perfume.
 The night is the night of mid-May, the breeze is the breeze of
   the south.
 I lose my way and I wander, I seek what I cannot get, I get what
   I do not seek.

 From my heart comes out and dances the image of my own desire.
 The gleaming vision flits on.
 I try to clasp it firmly, it eludes me and leads me astray.
 I seek what I cannot get, I get what I do not seek.



 16


 Hands cling to hands and eyes linger on eyes: thus begins the
   record of our hearts.
 It is the moonlit night of March; the sweet smell of _henna_
   is in the air; my flute lies on the earth neglected and your
   garland of flowers in unfinished.
 This love between you and me is simple as a song.

 Your veil of the saffron colour makes my eyes drunk.
 The jasmine wreath that you wove me thrills to my heart like
   praise.
 It is a game of giving and withholding, revealing and screening
   again; some smiles and some little shyness, and some sweet
   useless struggles.
 This love between you and me is simple as a song.

 No mystery beyond the present; no striving for the impossible; no
   shadow behind the charm; no groping in the depth of the dark.
 This love between you and me is simple as a song.

 We do not stray out of all words into the ever silent; we do not
   raise our hands to the void for things beyond hope.
 It is enough what we give and we get.
 We have not crushed the joy to the utmost to wring from it the
   wine of pain.
 This love between you and me is simple as a song.



 17


 The yellow bird sings in their tree and makes my heart dance with
   gladness.
 We both live in the same village, and that is our one piece of
   joy.
 Her pair of pet lambs come to graze in the shade of our garden
   trees.
 If they stray into our barley field, I take them up in my arms.
 The name of our village is Khanjan, and Anjan they call our
   river.
 My name is known to all the village, and her name is Ranjan.

 Only one field lies between us.
 Bees that have hived in our grove go to seek honey in theirs.
 Flowers launched from their landing-stairs come floating by the
   stream where we bathe.
 Baskets of dried _kusm_ flowers come from their fields to
   our market.
 The name of our village is Khanjan, and Anjan they call our
   river.
 My name is known to all the village, and her name is Ranjan.

 The lane that winds to their house is fragrant in the spring with
   mango flowers.
 When their linseed is ripe for harvest the hemp is in bloom in
   our field.
 The stars that smile on their cottage send us the same twinkling
   look.
 The rain that floods their tank makes glad our _kadam_
   forest.
 The name of our village is Khanjan, and Anjan they call our
   river.
 My name is known to all the village, and her name is Ranjan.



 18


 When the two sisters go to fetch water, they come to this spot
   and they smile.
 They must be aware of somebody who stands behind the trees
   whenever they go to fetch water.

 The two sisters whisper to each other when they pass this spot.
 They must have guessed the secret of that somebody who stands
   behind the trees whenever they go to fetch water.

 Their pitchers lurch suddenly, and water spills when they reach
   this spot.
 They must have found out that somebody's heart is beating who
   stands behind the trees whenever they go to fetch water.

 The two sisters glance at each other when they come to this spot,
   and they smile.
 There is a laughter in their swift-stepping feet, which makes
   confusion in somebody's mind who stands behind the trees
   whenever they go to fetch water.



 19


 You walked by the riverside path with the full pitcher upon your
   hip.
 Why did you swiftly turn your face and peep at me through your
   fluttering veil?
 That gleaming look from the dark came upon me like a breeze that
   sends a shiver through the rippling water and sweeps away to
   the shadowy shore.
 It came to me like the bird of the evening that hurriedly flies
   across the lampless room from the one open window to the other,
   and disappears in the night.
 You are hidden as a star behind the hills, and I am a passer-by
   upon the road.
 But why did you stop for a moment and glance at my face through
   your veil while you walked by the riverside path with the full
   pitcher upon your hip?



 20


 Day after day he comes and goes away.
 Go, and give him a flower from my hair, my friend.
 If he asks who was it that sent it, I entreat you do not tell him
   my name--for he only comes and goes away.

 He sits on the dust under the tree.
 Spread there a seat with flowers and leaves, my friend.
 His eyes are sad, and they bring sadness to my heart.
 He does not speak what he has in mind; he only comes and goes
   away.



 21


 Why did he choose to come to my door, the wandering youth, when
   the day dawned?
 As I come in and out I pass by him every time, and my eyes are
   caught by his face.
 I know not if I should speak to him or keep silent.  Why did he
   choose to come to my door?

 The cloudy nights in July are dark; the sky is soft blue in the
   autumn; the spring days are restless with the south wind.
 He weaves his songs with fresh tunes every time.
 I turn from my work and my eyes fill with the mist.  Why did he
   choose to come to my door?



 22


 When she passed by me with quick steps, the end of her skirt
   touched me.
 From the unknown island of a heart came a sudden warm breath of
   spring.
 A flutter of a flitting touch brushed me and vanished in a
   moment, like a torn flower petal blown in the breeze.
 It fell upon my heart like a sigh of her body and whisper of her
   heart.



 23


 Why do you sit there and jingle your bracelets in mere idle
   sport?
 Fill your pitcher.  It is time for you to come home.

 Why do you stir the water with your hands and fitfully glance at
   the road for some one in mere idle sport?
 Fill your pitcher and come home.

 The morning hours pass by--the dark water flows on.
 The waves are laughing and whispering to each other in mere idle
   sport.

 The wandering clouds have gathered at the edge of the sky on
   yonder rise of the land.
 They linger and look at your face and smile in mere idle sport.
 Fill your pitcher and come home.



 24


 Do not keep to yourself the secret of your heart, my friend!
 Say it to me, only to me, in secret.
 You who smile so gently, softly whisper, my heart will hear it,
   not my ears.

 The night is deep, the house is silent, the birds' nests are
   shrouded with sleep.
 Speak to me through hesitating tears, through faltering smiles,
   through sweet shame and pain, the secret of your heart!



 25


 "Come to us, youth, tell us truly why there is madness in your
   eyes?"
 "I know not what wine of wild poppy I have drunk, that there is
   this madness in my eyes."
 "Ah, shame!"
 "Well, some are wise and some foolish, some are watchful and some
   careless.  There are eyes that smile and eyes that weep--and
   madness is in my eyes."

 "Youth, why do you stand so still under the shadow of the tree?"
 "My feet are languid with the burden of my heart, and I stand
   still in the shadow."
 "Ah, shame!"
 "Well, some march on their way and some linger, some are free and
   some are fettered--and my feet are languid with the burden of
   my heart."



 26


 "What comes from your willing hands I take.  I beg for nothing
   more."
 "Yes, yes, I know you, modest mendicant, you ask for all that one
   has."

 "If there be a stray flower for me I will wear it in my heart."
 "But if there be thorns?"
 "I will endure them."
 "Yes, yes, I know you, modest mendicant, you ask for all that one
   has."

 "If but once you should raise your loving eyes to my face it
   would make my life sweet beyond death."
 "But if there by only cruel glances?"
 "I will keep them piercing my heart."
 "Yes, yes, I know you, modest mendicant, you ask for all that one
   has."



 27


 "Trust love even if it brings sorrow.  Do not close up your
   heart."
 "Ah no, my friend, your words are dark, I cannot understand
   them."

 "The heart is only for giving away with a tear and a song, my
   love."
 "Ah no, my friend, your words are dark, I cannot understand
   them."

 "Pleasure is frail like a dewdrop, while it laughs it dies.  But
   sorrow is strong and abiding.  Let sorrowful love wake in your
   eyes."
 "Ah no, my friend, your words are dark, I cannot understand
   them."

 "The lotus blooms in the sight of the sun, and loses all that it
   has.  It would not remain in bud in the eternal winter mist."
 "Ah no, my friend, your words are dark, I cannot understand
   them."



 28


 Your questioning eyes are sad.  They seek to know my meaning as
   the moon would fathom the sea.
 I have bared my life before your eyes from end to end, with
   nothing hidden or held back.  That is why you know me not.
 If it were only a gem I could break it into a hundred pieces and
   string them into a chain to put on your neck.
 If it were only a flower, round and small and sweet, I could
   pluck it from its stem to set it in your hair.
 But it is a heart, my beloved.  Where are its shores and its
   bottom?
 You know not the limits of this kingdom, still you are its queen.
 If it were only a moment of pleasure it would flower in an easy
   smile, and you could see it and read it in a moment.
 If it were merely a pain it would melt in limpid tears,
  reflecting its inmost secret without a word.
 But it is love, my beloved.
 Its pleasure and pain are boundless, and endless its wants and
   wealth.
 It is as near to you as your life, but you can never wholly know
   it.



 29


 Speak to me, my love!  Tell me in words what you sang.
 The night is dark.  The stars are lost in clouds.  The wind is
   sighing through the leaves.
 I will let loose my hair.  My blue cloak will cling round me like
   night.  I will clasp your head to my bosom; and there in the
   sweet loneliness murmur on your heart.  I will shut my eyes and
   listen.  I will not look in your face.
 When your words are ended, we will sit still and silent.  Only
   the trees will whisper in the dark.
 The night will pale.  The day will dawn.  We shall look at each
   other's eyes and go on our different paths.
 Speak to me, my love!  Tell me in words what you sang.



 30


 You are the evening cloud floating in the sky of my dreams.
 I paint you and fashion you ever with my love longings.
 You are my own, my own, Dweller in my endless dreams!

 Your feet are rosy-red with the glow of my heart's desire,
   Gleaner of my sunset songs!
 Your lips are bitter-sweet with the taste of my wine of pain.
 You are my own, my own, Dweller in my lonesome dreams!

 With the shadow of my passion have I darkened your eyes, Haunter
   of the depth of my gaze!
 I have caught you and wrapt you, my love, in the net of my music.
 You are my own, my own, Dweller in my deathless dreams!



 31


 My heart, the bird of the wilderness, has found its sky in your
   eyes.
 They are the cradle of the morning, they are the kingdom of the
   stars.
 My songs are lost in their depths.
 Let me but soar in that sky, in its lonely immensity.
 Let me but cleave its clouds and spread wings in its sunshine.



 32


 Tell me if this be all true, my lover, tell me if this be true.
 When these eyes flash their lightning the dark clouds in your
   breast make stormy answer.
 Is it true that my lips are sweet like the opening bud of the
   first conscious love?
 Do the memories of vanished months of May linger in my limbs?
 Does the earth, like a harp, shiver into songs with the touch of
   my feet?
 Is it then true that the dewdrops fall from the eyes of night
   when I am seen, and the morning light is glad when it wraps my
   body round?
 Is it true, is it true, that your love travelled alone through
   ages and worlds in search of me?
 That when you found me at last, your age-long desire found utter
   peace in my gentle speech and my eyes and lips and flowing
   hair?
 Is it then true that the mystery of the Infinite is written on
   this little forehead of mine?
 Tell me, my lover, if all this be true.



 33


 I love you, beloved.  Forgive me my love.
 Like a bird losing its way I am caught.
 When my heart was shaken it lost its veil and was naked.  Cover
   it with pity, beloved, and forgive me my love.

 If you cannot love me, beloved, forgive me my pain.
 Do not look askance at me from afar.
 I will steal back to my corner and sit in the dark.
 With both hands I will cover my naked shame.
 Turn your face from me, beloved, and forgive me my pain.

 If you love me, beloved, forgive me my joy.
 When my heart is borne away by the flood of happiness, do not
   smile at my perilous abandonment.
 When I sit on my throne and rule you with my tyranny of love,
   when like a goddess I grant you my favour, bear with my pride,
   beloved, and forgive me my joy.



 34


 Do not go, my love, without asking my leave.
 I have watched all night, and now my eyes are heavy with sleep.
 I fear lest I lose you when I am sleeping.
 Do not go, my love, without asking my leave.

 I start up and stretch my hands to touch you.  I ask myself, "Is
   it a dream?"
 Could I but entangle your feet with my heart and hold them fast
   to my breast!
 Do not go, my love, without asking my leave.



 35


 Lest I should know you too easily, you play with me.
 You blind me with flashes of laughter to hide your tears.
 I know, I know your art.
 You never say the word you would.

 Lest I should not prize you, you elude me in a thousand ways.
 Lest I should confuse you with the crowd, you stand aside.
 I know, I know your art,
 You never walk the path you would.

 Your claim is more than that of others, that is why you are
   silent.
 With playful carelessness you avoid my gifts.
 I know, I know your art,
 You never will take what you would.



 36


 He whispered, "My love, raise your eyes."
 I sharply chid him, and said "Go!"; but he did not stir.
 He stood before me and held both my hands.  I said, "Leave me!";
   but he did not go.

 He brought his face near my ear.  I glanced at him and said,
   "What a shame!"; but he did not move.
 His lips touched my cheek.  I trembled and said, "You dare too
   much;" but he had no shame.

 He put a flower in my hair.  I said, "It is useless!"; but he
   stood unmoved.
 He took the garland from my neck and went away.  I weep and ask
   my heart, "Why does he not come back?"



 37


 Would you put your wreath of fresh flowers on my neck, fair one?
 But you must know that the one wreath that I had woven is for the
   many, for those who are seen in glimpses, or dwell in lands
   unexplored, or live in poets' songs.

 It is too late to ask my heart in return for yours.
 There was a time when my life was like a bud, all its perfume was
   stored in its core.
 Now it is squandered far and wide.
 Who knows the enchantment that can gather and shut it up again?
 My heart is not mine to give to one only, it is given to the
   many.



 38


 My love, once upon a time your poet launched a great epic in his
   mind.
 Alas, I was not careful, and it struck your ringing anklets and
   came to grief.
 It broke up into scraps of songs and lay scattered at your feet.
 All my cargo of the stories of old wars was tossed by the
   laughing waves and soaked in tears and sank.
 You must make this loss good to me, my love.
 If my claims to immortal fame after death are shattered, make me
   immortal while I live.
 And I will not mourn for my loss nor blame you.



 39


 I try to weave a wreath all the morning, but the flowers slip and
   they drop out.
 You sit there watching me in secret through the corner of your
   prying eyes.
 Ask those eyes, darkly planning mischief, whose fault it was.

 I try to sing a song, but in vain.
 A hidden smile trembles on your lips, ask of it the reason of my
   failure.
 Let your smiling lips say on oath how my voice lost itself in
   silence like a drunken bee in the lotus.

 It is evening, and the time for the flowers to close their
   petals.
 Give me leave to sit by your side, and bid my lips to do the work
   that can be done in silence and in the dim light of stars.



 40


 An unbelieving smile flits on your eyes when I come to you to
   take my leave.
 I have done it so often that you think I will soon return.
 To tell you the truth I have the same doubt in my mind.
 For the spring days come again time after time; the full moon
   takes leave and comes on another visit, the flowers come again
   and blush upon their branches year after year, and it is likely
   that I take my leave only to come to you again.
 But keep the illusion awhile; do not send it away with ungentle
   haste.
 When I say I leave you for all time, accept it as true, and let a
   mist of tears for one moment deepen the dark rim of your eyes.
 Then smile as archly as you like when I come again.



 41


 I long to speak the deepest words I have to say to you; but I
   dare not, for fear you should laugh.
 That is why I laugh at myself and shatter my secret in jest.
 I make light of my pain, afraid you should do so.

 I long to tell you the truest words I have to say to you; but I
   dare not, being afraid that you would not believe them.
 That is why I disguise them in untruth, saying the contrary of
   what I mean.
 I make my pain appear absurd, afraid that you should do so.

 I long to use the most precious words I have for you; but I dare
   not, fearing I should not be paid with like value.
 That is why I gave you hard names and boast of my callous
   strength.
 I hurt you, for fear you should never know any pain.

 I long to sit silent by you; but I dare not lest my heart come
   out at my lips.
 That is why I prattle and chatter lightly and hide my heart
   behind words.
 I rudely handle my pain, for fear you should do so.

 I long to go away from your side; but I dare not, for fear my
   cowardice should become known to you.
 That is why I hold my head high and carelessly come into your
   presence.
 Constant thrusts from your eyes keep my pain fresh for ever.



 42


 O mad, superbly drunk;
 If you kick open your doors and play the fool in public;
 If you empty your bag in a night, and snap your fingers at
   prudence;
 If you walk in curious paths and play with useless things;
 Reck not rhyme or reason;
 If unfurling your sails before the storm you snap the rudder in
   two,
 Then I will follow you, comrade, and be drunken and go to the
   dogs.

 I have wasted my days and nights in the company of steady wise
   neighbours.
 Much knowing has turned my hair grey, and much watching has made
   my sight dim.
 For years I have gathered and heaped up scraps and fragments of
   things;
 Crush them and dance upon them, and scatter them all to the
   winds.
 For I know 'tis the height of wisdom to be drunken and go to the
   dogs.

 Let all crooked scruples vanish, let me hopelessly lose my way.
 Let a gust of wild giddiness come and sweep me away from my
   anchors.
 The world is peopled with worthies, and workers, useful and
   clever.
 There are men who are easily first, and men who come decently
   after.
 Let them be happy and prosper, and let me be foolishly futile.
 For I know 'tis the end of all works to be drunken and go to the
   dogs.

 I swear to surrender this moment all claims to the ranks of the
   decent.
 I let go my pride of learning and judgment of right and of wrong.
 I'll shatter memory's vessel, scattering the last drop of tears.
 With the foam of the berry-red wine I will bathe and brighten my
   laughter.
 The badge of the civil and staid I'll tear into shreds for the
   nonce.
 I'll take the holy vow to be worthless, to be drunken and go to
   the dogs.



 43


 No, my friends, I shall never be an ascetic, whatever you may say.
 I shall never be an ascetic if she does not take the vow with me.
 It is my firm resolve that if I cannot find a shady shelter and a
   companion for my penance, I shall never turn ascetic.

 No, my friends, I shall never leave my hearth and home, and
   retire into the forest solitude, if rings no merry laughter in
   its echoing shade and if the end of no saffron mantle flutters
   in the wind; if its silence is not deepened by soft whispers.
 I shall never be an ascetic.



 44


 Reverend sir, forgive this pair of sinners.  Spring winds to-day
   are blowing in wild eddies, driving dust and dead leaves away,
   and with them your lessons are all lost.
 Do not say, father, that life is a vanity.
 For we have made truce with death for once, and only for a few
   fragrant hours we two have been made immortal.

 Even if the king's army came and fiercely fell upon us we should
   sadly shake our heads and say, Brothers, you are disturbing us.
   If you must have this noisy game, go and clatter your arms
   elsewhere.  Since only for a few fleeting moments we have been
   made immortal.

 If friendly people came and flocked around us, we should humbly
   bow to them and say, This extravagant good fortune is an
   embarrassment to us.  Room is scarce in the infinite sky where
   we dwell.  For in the springtime flowers come in crowds, and
   the busy wings of bees jostle each other.  Our little heaven,
   where dwell only we two immortals, is too absurdly narrow.



 45


 To the guests that must go bid God's speed and brush away all
   traces of their steps.
 Take to your bosom with a smile what is easy and simple and near.
 To-day is the festival of phantoms that know not when they die.
 Let your laughter be but a meaningless mirth like twinkles of
   light on the ripples.
 Let your life lightly dance on the edges of Time like dew on the
   tip of a leaf.
 Strike in chords from your harp fitful momentary rhythms.



 46


 You left me and went on your way.
 I thought I should mourn for you and set your solitary image in
   my heart wrought in a golden song.
 But ah, my evil fortune, time is short.

 Youth wanes year after year; the spring days are fugitive; the
   frail flowers die for nothing, and the wise man warns me that
   life is but a dew-drop on the lotus leaf.
 Should I neglect all this to gaze after one who has turned her
   back on me?
 That would be rude and foolish, for time is short.

 Then, come, my rainy nights with pattering feet; smile, my golden
   autumn; come, careless April, scattering your kisses abroad.
 You come, and you, and you also!
 My loves, you know we are mortals.  Is it wise to break one's
   heart for the one who takes her heart away?  For time is short.

 It is sweet to sit in a corner to muse and write in rhymes that
   you are all my world.
 It is heroic to hug one's sorrow and determine not to be
   consoled.
 But a fresh face peeps across my door and raises its eyes to my
   eyes.
 I cannot but wipe away my tears and change the tune of my song.
 For time is short.



 47


 If you would have it so, I will end my singing.
 If it sets your heart aflutter, I will take away my eyes from
   your face.
 If it suddenly startles you in your walk, I will step aside and
   take another path.
 If it confuses you in your flower-weaving, I will shun your
   lonely garden.
 If it makes the water wanton and wild, I will not row my boat by
   your bank.



 48


 Free me from the bonds of your sweetness, my love!  No more of
   this wine of kisses.
 This mist of heavy incense stifles my heart.
 Open the doors, make room for the morning light.
 I am lost in you, wrapped in the folds of your caresses.
 Free me from your spells, and give me back the manhood to offer
   you my freed heart.



 49


 I hold her hands and press her to my breast.
 I try to fill my arms with her loveliness, to plunder her sweet
   smile with kisses, to drink her dark glances with my eyes.
 Ah, but, where is it?  Who can strain the blue from the sky?
 I try to grasp the beauty, it eludes me, leaving only the body in
   my hands.
 Baffled and weary I come back.
 How can the body touch the flower which only the spirit may
   touch?



 50


 Love, my heart longs day and night for the meeting with you--for
   the meeting that is like all-devouring death.
 Sweep me away like a storm; take everything I have; break open my
   sleep and plunder my dreams.  Rob me of my world.
 In that devastation, in the utter nakedness of spirit, let us
   become one in beauty.
 Alas for my vain desire!  Where is this hope for union except in
   thee, my God?



 51


 Then finish the last song and let us leave.
 Forget this night when the night is no more.
 Whom do I try to clasp in my arms?  Dreams can never be made
   captive.
 My eager hands press emptiness to my heart and it bruises my
   breast.



 52


 Why did the lamp go out?
 I shaded it with my cloak to save it from the wind, that is why
   the lamp went out.

 Why did the flower fade?
 I pressed it to my heart with anxious love, that is why the
   flower faded.

 Why did the stream dry up?
 I put a dam across it to have it for my use, that is why the
   stream dried up.

 Why did the harp-string break?
 I tried to force a note that was beyond its power, that is why
   the harp-string is broken.



 53


 Why do you put me to shame with a look?
 I have not come as a beggar.
 Only for a passing hour I stood at the end of your courtyard
   outside the garden hedge.
 Why do you put me to shame with a look?

 Not a rose did I gather from your garden, not a fruit did I
   pluck.
 I humbly took my shelter under the wayside shade where every
   strange traveller may stand.
 Not a rose did I pluck.

 Yes, my feet were tired, and the shower of rain come down.
 The winds cried out among the swaying bamboo branches.
 The clouds ran across the sky as though in the flight from
   defeat.
 My feet were tired.

 I know not what you thought of me or for whom you were waiting at
   your door.
 Flashes of lightning dazzled your watching eyes.
 How could I know that you could see me where I stood in the dark?
 I know not what you thought of me.

 The day is ended, and the rain has ceased for a moment.
 I leave the shadow of the tree at the end of your garden and this
   seat on the grass.
 It has darkened; shut your door; I go my way.
 The day is ended.



 54


 Where do you hurry with your basket this late evening when the
   marketing is over?
 They all have come home with their burdens; the moon peeps from
   above the village trees.
 The echoes of the voices calling for the ferry run across the
   dark water to the distant swamp where wild ducks sleep.
 Where do you hurry with your basket when the marketing is over?

 Sleep has laid her fingers upon the eyes of the earth.
 The nests of the crows have become silent, and the murmurs of the
   bamboo leaves are silent.
 The labourers home from their fields spread their mats in the
   courtyards.
 Where do you hurry with your basket when the marketing is over?



 55


 It was mid-day when you went away.
 The sun was strong in the sky.
 I had done my work and sat alone on my balcony when you went
   away.

 Fitful gusts came winnowing through the smells of many distant
   fields.
 The doves cooed tireless in the shade, and a bee strayed in my
   room humming the news of many distant fields.

 The village slept in the noonday heat.  The road lay deserted.
 In sudden fits the rustling of the leaves rose and died.
 I glazed at the sky and wove in the blue the letters of a name I
   had known, while the village slept in the noonday heat.

 I had forgotten to braid my hair.  The languid breeze played with
   it upon my cheek.
 The river ran unruffled under the shady bank.
 The lazy white clouds did not move.
 I had forgotten to braid my hair.

 It was mid-day when you went away.
 The dust of the road was hot and the fields panting.
 The doves cooed among the dense leaves.
 I was alone in my balcony when you went away.



 56


 I was one among many women busy with the obscure daily tasks of
   the household.
 Why did you single me out and bring me away from the cool shelter
   of our common life?

 Love unexpressed in sacred.  It shines like gems in the gloom of
   the hidden heart.  In the light of the curious day it looks
   pitifully dark.
 Ah, you broke through the cover of my heart and dragged my
   trembling love into the open place, destroying for ever the
   shady corner where it hid its nest.

 The other women are the same as ever.
 No one has peeped into their inmost being, and they themselves
   know not their own secret.
 Lightly they smile, and weep, chatter, and work.  Daily they go
   to the temple, light their lamps, and fetch water from the
   river.

 I hoped my love would be saved from the shivering shame of the
   shelterless, but you turn your face away.
 Yes, your path lies open before you, but you have cut off my
   return, and left me stripped naked before the world with its
   lidless eyes staring night and day.



 57


 I plucked your flower, O world!
 I pressed it to my heart and the thorn pricked.
 When the day waned and it darkened, I found that the flower had
   faded, but the pain remained.

 More flowers will come to you with perfume and pride, O world!
 But my time for flower-gathering is over, and through the dark
   night I have not my rose, only the pain remains.



 58


 One morning in the flower garden a blind girl came to offer me a
   flower chain in the cover of a lotus leaf.
 I put it round my neck, and tears came to my eyes.
 I kissed her and said, "You are blind even as the flowers are.
 You yourself know not how beautiful is your gift."



 59


 O woman, you are not merely the handiwork of God, but also of
   men; these are ever endowing you with beauty from their hearts.
 Poets are weaving for you a web with threads of golden imagery;
   painters are giving your form ever new immortality.
 The sea gives its pearls, the mines their gold, the summer
   gardens their flowers to deck you, to cover you, to make you
   more precious.
 The desire of men's hearts has shed its glory over your youth.
 You are one half woman and one half dream.



 60


 Amidst the rush and roar of life, O Beauty, carved in stone, you
   stand mute and still, alone and aloof.
 Great Time sits enamoured at your feet and murmurs:
 "Speak, speak to me, my love; speak, my bride!"
 But your speech is shut up in stone, O Immovable Beauty!



 61


 Peace, my heart, let the time for the parting be sweet.
 Let it not be a death but completeness.
 Let love melt into memory and pain into songs.
 Let the flight through the sky end in the folding of the wings
   over the nest.
 Let the last touch of your hands be gentle like the flower of the
   night.
 Stand still, O Beautiful End, for a moment, and say your last
   words in silence.
 I bow to you and hold up my lamp to light you on your way.



 62


 In the dusky path of a dream I went to seek the love who was mine
   in a former life.

 Her house stood at the end of a desolate street.
 In the evening breeze her pet peacock sat drowsing on its perch,
   and the pigeons were silent in their corner.

 She set her lamp down by the portal and stood before me.
 She raised her large eyes to my face and mutely asked, "Are you
   well, my friend?"
 I tried to answer, but our language had been lost and forgotten.

 I thought and thought; our names would not come to my mind.
 Tears shone in her eyes.  She held up her right hand to me.  I
   took it and stood silent.

 Our lamp had flickered in the evening breeze and died.



 63


 Traveller, must you go?
 The night is still and the darkness swoons upon the forest.
 The lamps are bright in our balcony, the flowers all fresh, and
   the youthful eyes still awake.
 Is the time for your parting come?
 Traveller, must you go?

 We have not bound your feet with our entreating arms.
 Your doors are open.  Your horse stands saddled at the gate.
 If we have tried to bar your passage it was but with our songs.
 Did we ever try to hold you back it was but with our eyes.
 Traveller, we are helpless to keep you.  We have only our tears.

 What quenchless fire glows in your eyes?
 What restless fever runs in your blood?
 What call from the dark urges you?
 What awful incantation have you read among the stars in the sky,
   that with a sealed secret message the night entered your heart,
   silent and strange?

 If you do not care for merry meetings, if you must have peace,
   weary heart, we shall put our lamps out and silence our harps.
 We shall sit still in the dark in the rustle of leaves, and the
   tired moon will shed pale rays on your window.
 O traveller, what sleepless spirit has touched you from the heart
   of the mid-night?



 64


 I spent my day on the scorching hot dust of the road.
 Now, in the cool of the evening, I knock at the door of the inn.
   It is deserted and in ruins.
 A grim _ashath_ tree spreads its hungry clutching roots
   through the gaping fissures of the walls.

 Days have been when wayfarers came here to wash their weary feet.
 They spread their mats in the courtyard in the dim light of the
   early moon, and sat and talked of strange lands.
 They work refreshed in the morning when birds made them glad, and
   friendly flowers nodded their heads at them from the wayside.

 But no lighted lamp awaited me when I came here.
 The black smudges of smoke left by many a forgotten evening lamp
   stare, like blind eyes, from the wall.
 Fireflies flit in the bush near the dried-up pond, and bamboo
   branches fling their shadows on the grass-grown path.
 I am the guest of no one at the end of my day.
 The long night is before me, and I am tired.



 65


 Is that your call again?
 The evening has come.  Weariness clings around me like the arms
   of entreating love.
 Do you call me?

 I had given all my day to you, cruel mistress, must you also rob
   me of my night?
 Somewhere there is an end to everything, and the loneness of the
   dark is one's own.
 Must your voice cut through it and smite me?

 Has the evening no music of sleep at your gate?
 Do the silent-winged stars never climb the sky above your
   pitiless tower?
 Do the flowers never drop on the dust in soft death in your
   garden?

 Must you call me, you unquiet one?
 Then let the sad eyes of love vainly watch and weep.
 Let the lamp burn in the lonely house.
 Let the ferry-boat take the weary labourers to their home.
 I leave behind my dreams and I hasten to your call.



 66


 A wandering madman was seeking the touchstone, with matted locks
   tawny and dust-laden, and body worn to a shadow, his lips
   tight-pressed, like the shut-up doors of his heart, his burning
   eyes like the lamp of a glow-worm seeking its mate.

 Before him the endless ocean roared.
 The garrulous waves ceaselessly talked of hidden treasures,
   mocking the ignorance that knew not their meaning.
 Maybe he now had no hope remaining, yet he would not rest, for
   the search had become his life,--
 Just as the ocean for ever lifts its arms to the sky for the
   unattainable--
 Just as the stars go in circles, yet seeking a goal that can
   never be reached--
 Even so on the lonely shore the madman with dusty tawny locks
   still roamed in search of the touchstone.

 One day a village boy came up and asked, "Tell me, where did you
   come at this golden chain about your waist?"
 The madman started--the chain that once was iron was verily gold;
   it was not a dream, but he did not know when it had changed.
 He struck his forehead wildly--where, O where had he without
   knowing it achieved success?
 It had grown into a habit, to pick up pebbles and touch the
   chain, and to throw them away without looking to see if a
   change had come; thus the madman found and lost the touchstone.
 The sun was sinking low in the west, the sky was of gold.
 The madman returned on his footsteps to seek anew the lost
   treasure, with his strength gone, his body bent, and his heart
   in the dust, like a tree uprooted.



 67


 Though the evening comes with slow steps and has signalled for
   all songs to cease;
 Though your companions have gone to their rest and you are tired;
 Though fear broods in the dark and the face of the sky is veiled;
 Yet, bird, O my bird, listen to me, do not close your wings.

 That is not the gloom of the leaves of the forest, that is the
   sea swelling like a dark black snake.
 That is not the dance of the flowering jasmine, that is flashing
   foam.
 Ah, where is the sunny green shore, where is your nest?
 Bird, O my bird, listen to me, do not close your wings.

 The lone night lies along your path, the dawn sleeps behind the
   shadowy hills.
 The stars hold their breath counting the hours, the feeble moon
   swims the deep night.
 Bird, O my bird, listen to me, do not close your wings.

 There is no hope, no fear for you.
 There is no word, no whisper, no cry.
 There is no home, no bed for rest.
 There is only your own pair of wings and the pathless sky.
 Bird, O my bird, listen to me, do not close your wings.



 68


 None lives for ever, brother, and nothing lasts for long.  Keep
   that in mind and rejoice.
 Our life is not the one old burden, our path is not the one long
   journey.
 One sole poet has not to sing one aged song.
 The flower fades and dies; but he who wears the flower has not to
   mourn for it for ever.
 Brother, keep that in mind and rejoice.

 There must come a full pause to weave perfection into music.
 Life droops toward its sunset to be drowned in the golden
   shadows.
 Love must be called from its play to drink sorrow and be borne to
   the heaven of tears.
 Brother, keep that in mind and rejoice.

 We hasten to gather our flowers lest they are plundered by the
   passing winds.
 It quickens our blood and brightens our eyes to snatch kisses
   that would vanish if we delayed.
 Our life is eager, our desires are keen, for time tolls the bell
   of parting.
 Brother, keep that in mind and rejoice.

 There is not time for us to clasp a thing and crush it and fling
   it away to the dust.
 The hours trip rapidly away, hiding their dreams in their skirts.
 Our life is short; it yields but a few days for love.
 Were it for work and drudgery it would be endlessly long.
 Brother, keep that in mind and rejoice.

 Beauty is sweet to us, because she dances to the same fleeting
   tune with our lives.
 Knowledge is precious to us, because we shall never have time to
   complete it.
 All is done and finished in the eternal Heaven.
 But earth's flowers of illusion are kept eternally fresh by
   death.
 Brother, keep that in mind and rejoice.



 69


 I hunt for the golden stag.
 You may smile, my friends, but I pursue the vision that eludes
   me.
 I run across hills and dales, I wander through nameless lands,
   because I am hunting for the golden stag.
 You come and buy in the market and go back to your homes laden
   with goods, but the spell of the homeless winds has touched me
   I know not when and where.
 I have no care in my heart; all my belongings I have left far
   behind me.
 I run across hills and dales, I wander through nameless lands--
   because I am hunting for the golden stag.



 70


 I remember a day in my childhood I floated a paper boat in the
   ditch.
 It was a wet day of July; I was alone and happy over my play.
 I floated my paper boat in the ditch.

 Suddenly the storm clouds thickened, winds came in gusts, and
   rain poured in torrents.
 Rills of muddy water rushed and swelled the stream and sunk my
   boat.
 Bitterly I thought in my mind that the storm came on purpose to
   spoil my happiness; all its malice was against me.

 The cloudy day of July is long today, and I have been musing over
   all those games in life wherein I was loser.
 I was blaming my fate for the many tricks it played on me, when
   suddenly I remembered the paper boat that sank in the ditch.



 71


 The day is not yet done, the fair is not over, the fair on the
   river-bank.
 I had feared that my time had been squandered and my last penny
   lost.
 But no, my brother, I have still something left.  My fate has not
   cheated me of everything.

 The selling and buying are over.
 All the dues on both sides have been gathered in, and it is time
   for me to go home.
 But, gatekeeper, do you ask for your toll?
 Do not fear, I have still something left.  My fate has not
   cheated me of everything.

 The lull in the wind threatens storm, and the lowering clouds in
   the west bode no good.
 The hushed water waits for the wind.
 I hurry to cross the river before the night overtakes me.
 O ferryman, you want your fee!
 Yes, brother, I have still something left.  My fate has not
   cheated me of everything.

 In the wayside under the tree sits the beggar.  Alas, he looks at
   my face with a timid hope!
 He thinks I am rich with the day's profit.
 Yes, brother, I have still something left.  My fate has not
   cheated me of everything.

 The night grows dark and the road lonely.  Fireflies gleam among
   the leaves.
 Who are you that follow me with stealthy silent steps?
 Ah, I know, it is your desire to rob me of all my gains.  I will
   not disappoint you!
 For I still have something left, and my fate has not cheated me
   of everything.

 At midnight I reach home.  My hands are empty.
 You are waiting with anxious eyes at my door, sleepless and
   silent.
 Like a timorous bird you fly to my breast with eager love.
 Ay, ay, my God, much remains still.  My fate has not cheated me
   of everything.



 72


 With days of hard travail I raised a temple.  It had no doors or
   windows, its walls were thickly built with massive stones.
 I forgot all else, I shunned all the world, I gazed in rapt
   contemplation at the image I had set upon the altar.
 It was always night inside, and lit by the lamps of perfumed oil.
 The ceaseless smoke of incense wound my heart in its heavy coils.
 Sleepless, I carved on the walls fantastic figures in mazy
   bewildering lines--winged horses, flowers with human faces,
   women with limbs like serpents.
 No passage was left anywhere through which could enter the song
   of birds, the murmur of leaves or hum of the busy village.
 The only sound that echoed in its dark dome was that of
   incantations which I chanted.
 My mind became keen and still like a pointed flame, my senses
   swooned in ecstasy.
 I knew not how time passed till the thunderstone had struck the
   temple, and a pain stung me through the heart.

 The lamp looked pale and ashamed; the carvings on the walls, like
   chained dreams, stared meaningless in the light as they would
   fain hide themselves.
 I looked at the image on the altar.  I saw it smiling and alive
   with the living touch of God.  The night I had imprisoned had
   spread its wings and vanished.



 73


 Infinite wealth is not yours, my patient and dusky mother dust!
 You toil to fill the mouths of your children, but food is scarce.
 The gift of gladness that you have for us is never perfect.
 The toys that you make for your children are fragile.
 You cannot satisfy all our hungry hopes, but should I desert you
   for that?
 Your smile which is shadowed with pain is sweet to my eyes.
 Your love which knows not fulfilment is dear to my heart.
 From your breast you have fed us with life but not immortality,
   that is why your eyes are ever wakeful.
 For ages you are working with colour and song, yet your heaven is
   not built, but only its sad suggestion.
 Over your creations of beauty there is the mist of tears.
 I will pour my songs into your mute heart, and my love into your
   love.
 I will worship you with labour.
 I have seen your tender face and I love your mournful dust,
   Mother Earth.



 74


 In the world's audience hall, the simple blade of grass sits on
   the same carpet with the sunbeam and the stars of midnight.
 Thus my songs share their seats in the heart of the world with
   the music of the clouds and forests.
 But, you man of riches, your wealth has no part in the simple
   grandeur of the sun's glad gold and the mellow gleam of the
   musing moon.
 The blessing of all-embracing sky is not shed upon it.
 And when death appears, it pales and withers and crumbles into
   dust.



 75


 At midnight the would-be ascetic announced:
 "This is the time to give up my home and seek for God.  Ah, who
   has held me so long in delusion here?"
 God whispered, "I," but the ears of the man were stopped.
 With a baby asleep at her breast lay his wife, peacefully
   sleeping on one side of the bed.
 The man said, "Who are ye that have fooled me so long?"
 The voice said again, "They are God," but he heard it not.
 The baby cried out in its dream, nestling close to its mother.
 God commanded, "Stop, fool, leave not thy home," but still he
   heard not.
 God sighed and complained, "Why does my servant wander to seek
   me, forsaking me?"



 76


 The fair was on before the temple.  It had rained from the early
   morning and the day came to its end.
 Brighter than all the gladness of the crowd was the bright smile
   of a girl who bought for a farthing a whistle of palm leaf.
 The shrill joy of that whistle floated above all laughter and
   noise.
 An endless throng of people came and jostled together.  The road
   was muddy, the river in flood, the field under water in
   ceaseless rain.
 Greater than all the troubles of the crowd was a little boy's
   trouble--he had not a farthing to buy a painted stick.
 His wistful eyes gazing at the shop made this whole meeting of
   men so pitiful.



 77


 The workman and his wife from the west country are busy digging
   to make bricks for the kiln.
 Their little daughter goes to the landing-place by the river;
   there she has no end of scouring and scrubbing of pots and
   pans.
 Her little brother, with shaven head and brown, naked, mud-
   covered limbs, follows after her and waits patiently on the
   high bank at her bidding.
 She goes back home with the full pitcher poised on her head, the
   shining brass pot in her left hand, holding the child with her
   right--she the tiny servant of her mother, grave with the
   weight of the household cares.

 One day I saw this naked boy sitting with legs outstretched.
 In the water his sister sat rubbing a drinking-pot with a handful
   of earth, turning it round and round.
 Near by a soft-haired lamb stood gazing along the bank.
 It came close to where the boy sat and suddenly bleated aloud,
   and the child started up and screamed.
 His sister left off cleaning her pot and ran up.
 She took up her brother in one arm and the lamb in the other, and
   dividing her caresses between them bound in one bond of
   affection the offspring of beast and man.



 78


 It was in May.  The sultry noon seemed endlessly long.  The dry
   earth gaped with thirst in the heat.
 When I heard from the riverside a voice calling, "Come, my
   darling!"
 I shut my book and opened the window to look out.
 I saw a big buffalo with mud-stained hide, standing near the
   river with placid, patient eyes; and a youth, knee deep in
   water, calling it to its bath.
 I smiled amused and felt a touch of sweetness in my heart.



 79


 I often wonder where lie hidden the boundaries of recognition
   between man and the beast whose heart knows no spoken language.
 Through what primal paradise in a remote morning of creation ran
   the simple path by which their hearts visited each other.
 Those marks of their constant tread have not been effaced though
   their kinship has been long forgotten.
 Yet suddenly in some wordless music the dim memory wakes up and
   the beast gazes into the man's face with a tender trust, and
   the man looks down into its eyes with amused affection.
 It seems that the two friends meet masked and vaguely know each
   other through the disguise.



 80


 With a glance of your eyes you could plunder all the wealth of
   songs struck from poets' harps, fair woman!
 But for their praises you have no ear, therefore I come to praise
   you.
 You could humble at your feet the proudest heads in the world.
 But it is your loved ones, unknown to fame, whom you choose to
   worship, therefore I worship you.
 The perfection of your arms would add glory to kingly splendour
   with their touch.
 But you use them to sweep away the dust, and to make clean your
   humble home, therefore I am filled with awe.



 81


 Why do you whisper so faintly in my ears, O Death, my Death?
 When the flowers droop in the evening and cattle come back to
   their stalls, you stealthily come to my side and speak words
   that I do not understand.
 Is this how you must woo and win me with the opiate of drowsy
   murmur and cold kisses, O Death, my Death?

 Will there be no proud ceremony for our wedding?
 Will you not tie up with a wreath your tawny coiled locks?
 Is there none to carry your banner before you, and will not the
   night be on fire with your red torch-lights, O Death, my Death?

 Come with your conch-shells sounding, come in the sleepless
   night.
 Dress me with a crimson mantle, grasp my hand and take me.
 Let your chariot be ready at my door with your horses neighing
   impatiently.
 Raise my veil and look at my face proudly, O Death, my Death!



 82


 We are to play the game of death to-night, my bride and I.
 The night is black, the clouds in the sky are capricious, and the
   waves are raving at sea.
 We have left our bed of dreams, flung open the door and come out,
   my bride and I.
 We sit upon a swing, and the storm winds give us a wild push from
   behind.
 My bride starts up with fear and delight, she trembles and clings
   to my breast.
 Long have I served her tenderly.
 I made for her a bed of flowers and I closed the doors to shut
   out the rude light from her eyes.
 I kissed her gently on her lips and whispered softly in her ears
   till she half swooned in languor.
 She was lost in the endless mist of vague sweetness.
 She answered not to my touch, my songs failed to arouse her.
 To-night has come to us the call of the storm from the wild.
 My bride has shivered and stood up, she has clasped my hand and
   come out.
 Her hair is flying in the wind, her veil is fluttering, her
   garland rustles over her breast.
 The push of death has swung her into life.
 We are face to face and heart to heart, my bride and I.



 83


 She dwelt on the hillside by the edge of a maize-field, near the
   spring that flows in laughing rills through the solemn shadows
   of ancient trees.  The women came there to fill their jars, and
   travellers would sit there to rest and talk.  She worked and
   dreamed daily to the tune of the bubbling stream.

 One evening the stranger came down from the cloud-hidden peak;
   his locks were tangled like drowsy snakes.  We asked in wonder,
   "Who are you?"  He answered not but sat by the garrulous stream
   and silently gazed at the hut where she dwelt.  Our hearts
   quaked in fear and we came back home when it was night.

 Next morning when the women came to fetch water at the spring by
   the _deodar_ trees, they found the doors open in her hut,
   but her voice was gone and where was her smiling face?  The
   empty jar lay on the floor and her lamp had burnt itself out in
   the corner.  No one knew where she had fled to before it was
   morning--and the stranger had gone.

 In the month of May the sun grew strong and the snow melted, and
   we sat by the spring and wept.  We wondered in our mind, "Is
   there a spring in the land where she has gone and where she can
   fill her vessel in these hot thirsty days?"  And we asked each
   other in dismay, "Is there a land beyond these hills where we
   live?"

 It was a summer night; the breeze blew from the south; and I sat
   in her deserted room where the lamp stood still unlit.  When
   suddenly from before my eyes the hills vanished like curtains
   drawn aside.  "Ah, it is she who comes.  How are you, my child?
   Are you happy?  But where can you shelter under this open sky?
   And, alas, our spring is not here to allay your thirst."

 "Here is the same sky," she said, "only free from the fencing
   hills,--this is the same stream grown into a river,--the same
   earth widened into a plain."  "Everything is here," I sighed,
   "only we are not."  She smiled sadly and said, "You are in my
   heart."  I woke up and heard the babbling of the stream and the
   rustling of the _deodars_ at night.



 84


 Over the green and yellow rice-fields sweep the shadows of the
   autumn clouds followed by the swift chasing sun.
 The bees forget to sip their honey; drunken with light they
   foolishly hover and hum.
 The ducks in the islands of the river clamour in joy for mere
   nothing.
 Let none go back home, brothers, this morning, let none go to
   work.
 Let us take the blue sky by storm and plunder space as we run.
 Laughter floats in the air like foam on the flood.
 Brothers, let us squander our morning in futile songs.



 85


 Who are you, reader, reading my poems an hundred years hence?
 I cannot send you one single flower from this wealth of the
   spring, one single streak of gold from yonder clouds.
 Open your doors and look abroad.
 From your blossoming garden gather fragrant memories of the
   vanished flowers of an hundred years before.
 In the joy of your heart may you feel the living joy that sang
   one spring morning, sending its glad voice across an hundred
   years.




 INDEX OF FIRST WORDS


                                                                No.
  A wandering madman was seeking the touchstone                 66
  Ah me, why did they build my house                             4
  Ah, poet, the evening draws near                               2
  Amidst the rush and roar of life                              60
  An unbelieving smile flits on your eyes                       40
  At midnight the would-be ascetic announced                    75

  Come as you are; do not loiter over your toilet               11
  Come to us, youth, tell us truly                              25

  Day after day he comes and goes away                          20
  Do not go, my love, without asking my leave                   34
  Do not keep to yourself the secret of your heart, my friend   24

  Free me from the bonds of your sweetness, my love             48

  Hands cling to hands and eyes linger on eyes                  16
  Have mercy upon your servant, my queen                         1
  He whispered, "My love, raise your eyes"                      36

  I am restless                                                  5
  I asked nothing, only stood at the edge of the wood           13
  I hold her hands and press her to my breast                   49
  I hunt for the golden stag                                    69
  I long to speak the deepest words                             41
  I love you, beloved                                           33
  I often wonder where lie hidden                               79
  I plucked your flower, O world                                57
  I remember a day in my childhood                              70
  I run as a musk-deer runs in the shadow of the forest         15
  I spent my day on the scorching hot dust of the road          64
  I try to weave a wreath all the morning                       39
  I was one among many women                                    56
  I was walking by the road, I do not know why                  14
  If you would be busy and fill your pitcher, come              12
  If you would have it so, I will end my singing                47
  In the dusky path of a dream I went to seek the love          62
  In the morning I cast my net into the sea                      3
  In the world's audience hall                                  74
  Infinite wealth is not yours                                  73
  Is that your call again                                       65
  It was in May                                                 78
  It was mid-day when you want away                             55

  Lest I should know you too easily, you play with me           35
  Let your work be, bride                                       10
  Love, my heart longs day and night                            50

  My heart, the bird of the wilderness                          31
  My love, once upon a time your poet launched a great epic     38

  No, my friends, I shall never be an ascetic                   43
  None lives for ever, brother                                  68

  O mad, superbly drunk                                         42
  O mother, the young Prince is to pass by our door              7
  O woman, you are not merely the handiwork of God              59
  One morning in the flower garden a blind girl came            58
  Over the green and yellow rice-fields                         84

  Peace, my heart, let the time for the parting be sweet        61

  Reverend sir, forgive this pair of sinners                    44

  She dwelt on the hillside                                     83
  Speak to me, my love                                          29

  Tell me if this be all true, my lover                         32
  The day is not yet done, the fair is not over                 71
  The fair was on before the temple                             76
  The tame bird was in a cage                                    6
  The workman and his wife from the west country                77
  The yellow bird sings in their tree                           17
  Then finish the last song and let us leave                    51
  Though the evening comes with slow steps                      67
  To the guests that must go bid God's speed                    45
  Traveller, must you go                                        63
  Trust love even if it brings sorrow                           27

  We are to play the game of death to-night                     82
  What comes from your willing hands I take                     26
  When I go alone at night to my love-tryst                      9
  When she passed by me with quick steps                        22
  When the lamp went out by my bed                               8
  When the two sisters go to fetch water                        18
  Where do you hurry with your basket                           54
  Who are you, reader, reading my poems                         85
  Why did he choose to come to my door                          21
  Why did the lamp go out                                       52
  Why do you put me to shame with a look                        53
  Why do you sit there and jingle your bracelets                23
  Why do you whisper so faintly in my ears                      81
  With a glance of your eyes you could plunder                  80
  With days of hard travail I raised a temple                   72
  Would you put your wreath of fresh flowers on my neck         37

  You are the evening cloud floating in the sky of my dreams    30
  You left me and went on your way                              46
  You walked by the riverside path                              19
  Your questioning eyes are sad                                 28







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GARDENER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Home and the World
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Home and the World

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Translator: Surendranath Tagore

Release date: December 1, 2004 [eBook #7166]
                Most recently updated: December 30, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred. This eBook was produced by Chetan Jain, Viswas G and Anand Rao at Bharat Literature


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOME AND THE WORLD ***




Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred.
This eBook was produced by Chetan Jain, Viswas G and Anand Rao
at Bharat Literature





The Home and the World


Rabindranath Tagore


[1861-1941]


Translated [from Bengali to English]
by Surendranath Tagore


London: Macmillan, 1919
[published in India, 1915, 1916]


[Frontispiece: --see woman.jpg]




Chapter One

Bimala's Story

I


MOTHER, today there comes back to mind the vermilion mark [1] at
the parting of your hair, the __sari__ [2] which you used to
wear, with its wide red border, and those wonderful eyes of
yours, full of depth and peace.  They came at the start of my
life's journey, like the first streak of dawn, giving me golden
provision to carry me on my way.

The sky which gives light is blue, and my mother's face was dark,
but she had the radiance of holiness, and her beauty would put to
shame all the vanity of the beautiful.

Everyone says that I resemble my mother.  In my childhood I used
to resent this.  It made me angry with my mirror.  I thought that
it was God's unfairness which was wrapped round my limbs--that my
dark features were not my due, but had come to me by some
misunderstanding.  All that remained for me to ask of my God in
reparation was, that I might grow up to be a model of what woman
should be, as one reads it in some epic poem.

When the proposal came for my marriage, an astrologer was sent,
who consulted my palm and said, "This girl has good signs.  She
will become an ideal wife."

And all the women who heard it said: "No wonder, for she
resembles her mother."

I was married into a Rajah's house.  When I was a child, I was
quite familiar with the description of the Prince of the fairy
story.  But my husband's face was not of a kind that one's
imagination would place in fairyland.  It was dark, even as mine
was.  The feeling of shrinking, which I had about my own lack of
physical beauty, was lifted a little; at the same time a touch of
regret was left lingering in my heart.

But when the physical appearance evades the scrutiny of our
senses and enters the sanctuary of our hearts, then it can forget
itself.  I know, from my childhood's experience, how devotion is
beauty itself, in its inner aspect.  When my mother arranged the
different fruits, carefully peeled by her own loving hands, on
the white stone plate, and gently waved her fan to drive away the
flies while my father sat down to his meals, her service would
lose itself in a beauty which passed beyond outward forms.  Even
in my infancy I could feel its power.  It transcended all
debates, or doubts, or calculations: it was pure music.

I distinctly remember after my marriage, when, early in the
morning, I would cautiously and silently get up and take the dust
[3] of my husband's feet without waking him, how at such moments
I could feel the vermilion mark upon my forehead shining out like
the morning star.

One day, he happened to awake, and smiled as he asked me: "What
is that, Bimala?  What __are__ you doing?"

I can never forget the shame of being detected by him.  He might
possibly have thought that I was trying to earn merit secretly.
But no, no!  That had nothing to do with merit.  It was my
woman's heart, which must worship in order to love.

My father-in-law's house was old in dignity from the days of the
__Badshahs__.  Some of its manners were of the Moguls and
Pathans, some of its customs of Manu and Parashar.  But my
husband was absolutely modern.  He was the first of the house to
go through a college course and take his M.A.  degree.  His elder
brother had died young, of drink, and had left no children.  My
husband did not drink and was not given to dissipation.  So
foreign to the family was this abstinence, that to many it hardly
seemed decent!  Purity, they imagined, was only becoming in those
on whom fortune had not smiled.  It is the moon which has room
for stains, not the stars.

My husband's parents had died long ago, and his old grandmother
was mistress of the house.  My husband was the apple of her eye,
the jewel on her bosom.  And so he never met with much difficulty
in overstepping any of the ancient usages.  When he brought in
Miss Gilby, to teach me and be my companion, he stuck to his
resolve in spite of the poison secreted by all the wagging
tongues at home and outside.

My husband had then just got through his B.A.  examination and
was reading for his M.A.  degree; so he had to stay in Calcutta
to attend college.  He used to write to me almost every day, a
few lines only, and simple words, but his bold, round handwriting
would look up into my face, oh, so tenderly!  I kept his letters
in a sandalwood box and covered them every day with the flowers I
gathered in the garden.

At that time the Prince of the fairy tale had faded, like the
moon in the morning light.  I had the Prince of my real world
enthroned in my heart.  I was his queen.  I had my seat by his
side.  But my real joy was, that my true place was at his feet.

Since then, I have been educated, and introduced to the modern
age in its own language, and therefore these words that I write
seem to blush with shame in their prose setting.  Except for my
acquaintance with this modern standard of life, I should know,
quite naturally, that just as my being born a woman was not in my
own hands, so the element of devotion in woman's love is not like
a hackneyed passage quoted from a romantic poem to be piously
written down in round hand in a school-girl's copy-book.

But my husband would not give me any opportunity for worship.
That was his greatness.  They are cowards who claim absolute
devotion from their wives as their right; that is a humiliation
for both.

His love for me seemed to overflow my limits by its flood of
wealth and service.  But my necessity was more for giving than
for receiving; for love is a vagabond, who can make his flowers
bloom in the wayside dust, better than in the crystal jars kept
in the drawing-room.

My husband could not break completely with the old-time
traditions which prevailed in our family.  It was difficult,
therefore, for us to meet at any hour of the day we pleased.  [4]
I knew exactly the time that he could come to me, and therefore
our meeting had all the care of loving preparation.  It was like
the rhyming of a poem; it had to come through the path of the
metre.

After finishing the day's work and taking my afternoon bath, I
would do up my hair and renew my vermilion mark and put on my
__sari__, carefully crinkled; and then, bringing back my body
and mind from all distractions of household duties, I would
dedicate it at this special hour, with special ceremonies, to one
individual.  That time, each day, with him was short; but it was
infinite.

My husband used to say, that man and wife are equal in love
because of their equal claim on each other.  I never argued the
point with him, but my heart said that devotion never stands in
the way of true equality; it only raises the level of the ground
of meeting.  Therefore the joy of the higher equality remains
permanent; it never slides down to the vulgar level of triviality.

My beloved, it was worthy of you that you never expected worship
from me.  But if you had accepted it, you would have done me a
real service.  You showed your love by decorating me, by
educating me, by giving me what I asked for, and what I did not.
I have seen what depth of love there was in your eyes when you
gazed at me.  I have known the secret sigh of pain you suppressed
in your love for me.  You loved my body as if it were a flower of
paradise.  You loved my whole nature as if it had been given you
by some rare providence.

Such lavish devotion made me proud to think that the wealth was
all my own which drove you to my gate.  But vanity such as this
only checks the flow of free surrender in a woman's love.  When I
sit on the queen's throne and claim homage, then the claim only
goes on magnifying itself; it is never satisfied.  Can there be
any real happiness for a woman in merely feeling that she has
power over a man?  To surrender one's pride in devotion is
woman's only salvation.

It comes back to me today how, in the days of our happiness, the
fires of envy sprung up all around us.  That was only natural,
for had I not stepped into my good fortune by a mere chance, and
without deserving it?  But providence does not allow a run of
luck to last for ever, unless its debt of honour be fully paid,
day by day, through many a long day, and thus made secure.  God
may grant us gifts, but the merit of being able to take and hold
them must be our own.  Alas for the boons that slip through
unworthy hands!

My husband's grandmother and mother were both renowned for their
beauty.  And my widowed sister-in-law was also of a beauty rarely
to be seen.  When, in turn, fate left them desolate, the
grandmother vowed she would not insist on having beauty for her
remaining grandson when he married.  Only the auspicious marks
with which I was endowed gained me an entry into this family--
otherwise, I had no claim to be here.

In this house of luxury, but few of its ladies had received their
meed of respect.  They had, however, got used to the ways of the
family, and managed to keep their heads above water, buoyed up by
their dignity as __Ranis__ of an ancient house, in spite of
their daily tears being drowned in the foam of wine, and by the
tinkle of the "dancing girls" anklets.  Was the credit due to me
that my husband did not touch liquor, nor squander his manhood in
the markets of woman's flesh?  What charm did I know to soothe
the wild and wandering mind of men?  It was my good luck, nothing
else.  For fate proved utterly callous to my sister-in-law.  Her
festivity died out, while yet the evening was early, leaving the
light of her beauty shining in vain over empty halls--burning and
burning, with no accompanying music!

His sister-in-law affected a contempt for my husband's modern
notions.  How absurd to keep the family ship, laden with all the
weight of its time-honoured glory, sailing under the colours of
his slip of a girl-wife alone!  Often have I felt the lash of
scorn.  "A thief who had stolen a husband's love!"  "A sham
hidden in the shamelessness of her new-fangled finery!"  The
many-coloured garments of modern fashion with which my husband
loved to adorn me roused jealous wrath.  "Is not she ashamed to
make a show-window of herself--and with her looks, too!"

My husband was aware of all this, but his gentleness knew no
bounds.  He used to implore me to forgive her.

I remember I once told him: "Women's minds are so petty, so
crooked!"  "Like the feet of Chinese women," he replied.  "Has
not the pressure of society cramped them into pettiness and
crookedness?  They are but pawns of the fate which gambles with
them.  What responsibility have they of their own?"

My sister-in-law never failed to get from my husband whatever she
wanted.  He did not stop to consider whether her requests were
right or reasonable.  But what exasperated me most was that she
was not grateful for this.  I had promised my husband that I
would not talk back at her, but this set me raging all the more,
inwardly.  I used to feel that goodness has a limit, which, if
passed, somehow seems to make men cowardly.  Shall I tell the
whole truth?  I have often wished that my husband had the
manliness to be a little less good.

My sister-in-law, the Bara Rani, [5] was still young and had no
pretensions to saintliness.  Rather, her talk and jest and laugh
inclined to be forward.  The young maids with whom she surrounded
herself were also impudent to a degree.  But there was none to
gainsay her--for was not this the custom of the house?  It seemed
to me that my good fortune in having a stainless husband was a
special eyesore to her.  He, however, felt more the sorrow of her
lot than the defects of her character.

------

1. The mark of Hindu wifehood and the symbol of all the devotion
that it implies.

2. The __sari__ is the dress of the Hindu woman.

3. Taking the dust of the feet is a formal offering of reverence
and is done by lightly touching the feet of the revered one and
then one's own head with the same hand.  The wife does not
ordinarily do this to the husband.

4. It would not be reckoned good form for the husband to be
continually going into the zenana, except at particular hours for
meals or rest.

5. __Bara__ = Senior; __Chota__ = Junior.  In joint
families of rank, though the widows remain entitled only to a
life-interest in their husbands' share, their rank remains to
them according to seniority, and the titles "Senior" and "Junior"
continue to distinguish the elder and younger branches, even
though the junior branch be the one in power.



II



My husband was very eager to take me out of __purdah__.  [6]

One day I said to him: "What do I want with the outside world?"

"The outside world may want you," he replied.

"If the outside world has got on so long without me, it may go on
for some time longer.  It need not pine to death for want of me."

"Let it perish, for all I care!  That is not troubling me.  I am
thinking about myself."

"Oh, indeed.  Tell me what about yourself?"

My husband was silent, with a smile.

I knew his way, and protested at once: "No, no, you are not going
to run away from me like that!  I want to have this out with
you."

"Can one ever finish a subject with words?"

"Do stop speaking in riddles.  Tell me..."

"What I want is, that I should have you, and you should have me,
more fully in the outside world.  That is where we are still in
debt to each other."

"Is anything wanting, then, in the love we have here at home?"

"Here you are wrapped up in me.  You know neither what you have,
nor what you want."

"I cannot bear to hear you talk like this."

"I would have you come into the heart of the outer world and meet
reality.  Merely going on with your household duties, living all
your life in the world of household conventions and the drudgery
of household tasks--you were not made for that!  If we meet, and
recognize each other, in the real world, then only will our love
be true."

"If there be any drawback here to our full recognition of each
other, then I have nothing to say.  But as for myself, I feel no
want."

"Well, even if the drawback is only on my side, why shouldn't you
help to remove it?"

Such discussions repeatedly occurred.  One day he said: "The
greedy man who is fond of his fish stew has no compunction in
cutting up the fish according to his need.  But the man who loves
the fish wants to enjoy it in the water; and if that is
impossible he waits on the bank; and even if he comes back home
without a sight of it he has the consolation of knowing that the
fish is all right.  Perfect gain is the best of all; but if that
is impossible, then the next best gain is perfect losing."

I never liked the way my husband had of talking on this subject,
but that is not the reason why I refused to leave the zenana.
His grandmother was still alive.  My husband had filled more than
a hundred and twenty per cent of the house with the twentieth
century, against her taste; but she had borne it uncomplaining.
She would have borne it, likewise, if the daughter-in-law [7] of
the Rajah's house had left its seclusion.  She was even prepared
for this happening.  But I did not consider it important enough
to give her the pain of it.  I have read in books that we are
called "caged birds".  I cannot speak for others, but I had so
much in this cage of mine that there was not room for it in the
universe--at least that is what I then felt.

The grandmother, in her old age, was very fond of me.  At the
bottom of her fondness was the thought that, with the conspiracy
of favourable stars which attended me, I had been able to attract
my husband's love.  Were not men naturally inclined to plunge
downwards?  None of the others, for all their beauty, had been
able to prevent their husbands going headlong into the burning
depths which consumed and destroyed them.  She believed that I
had been the means of extinguishing this fire, so deadly to the
men of the family.  So she kept me in the shelter of her bosom,
and trembled if I was in the least bit unwell.

His grandmother did not like the dresses and ornaments my husband
brought from European shops to deck me with.  But she reflected:
"Men will have some absurd hobby or other, which is sure to be
expensive.  It is no use trying to check their extravagance; one
is glad enough if they stop short of ruin.  If my Nikhil had not
been busy dressing up his wife there is no knowing whom else he
might have spent his money on!"  So whenever any new dress of
mine arrived she used to send for my husband and make merry over
it.

Thus it came about that it was her taste which changed.  The
influence of the modern age fell so strongly upon her, that her
evenings refused to pass if I did not tell her stories out of
English books.

After his grandmother's death, my husband wanted me to go and
live with him in Calcutta.  But I could not bring myself to do
that.  Was not this our House, which she had kept under her
sheltering care through all her trials and troubles?  Would not a
curse come upon me if I deserted it and went off to town?  This
was the thought that kept me back, as her empty seat
reproachfully looked up at me.  That noble lady had come into
this house at the age of eight, and had died in her seventy-ninth
year.  She had not spent a happy life.  Fate had hurled shaft
after shaft at her breast, only to draw out more and more the
imperishable spirit within.  This great house was hallowed with
her tears.  What should I do in the dust of Calcutta, away from
it?

My husband's idea was that this would be a good opportunity for
leaving to my sister-in-law the consolation of ruling over the
household, giving our life, at the same time, more room to branch
out in Calcutta.  That is just where my difficulty came in.  She
had worried my life out, she ill brooked my husband's happiness,
and for this she was to be rewarded!  And what of the day when we
should have to come back here?  Should I then get back my seat at
the head?

"What do you want with that seat?"  my husband would say.  "Are
there not more precious things in life?"

Men never understand these things.  They have their nests in the
outside world; they little know the whole of what the household
stands for.  In these matters they ought to follow womanly
guidance.  Such were my thoughts at that time.

I felt the real point was, that one ought to stand up for one's
rights.  To go away, and leave everything in the hands of the
enemy, would be nothing short of owning defeat.

But why did not my husband compel me to go with him to Calcutta?
I know the reason.  He did not use his power, just because he had
it.

------

6. The seclusion of the zenana, and all the customs peculiar to
it, are designated by the general term "Purdah", which means
Screen.

7. The prestige of the daughter-in-law is of the first importance
in a Hindu household of rank [Trans.].




III


IF one had to fill in, little by little, the gap between day and
night, it would take an eternity to do it.  But the sun rises and
the darkness is dispelled--a moment is sufficient to overcome an
infinite distance.

One day there came the new era of __Swadeshi__ [8] in Bengal;
but as to how it happened, we had no distinct vision.  There was
no gradual slope connecting the past with the present.  For that
reason, I imagine, the new epoch came in like a flood, breaking
down the dykes and sweeping all our prudence and fear before it.
We had no time even to think about, or understand, what had
happened, or what was about to happen.

My sight and my mind, my hopes and my desires, became red with
the passion of this new age.  Though, up to this time, the walls
of the home--which was the ultimate world to my mind--remained
unbroken, yet I stood looking over into the distance, and I heard
a voice from the far horizon, whose meaning was not perfectly
clear to me, but whose call went straight to my heart.

From the time my husband had been a college student he had been
trying to get the things required by our people produced in our
own country.  There are plenty of date trees in our district.  He
tried to invent an apparatus for extracting the juice and boiling
it into sugar and treacle.  I heard that it was a great success,
only it extracted more money than juice.  After a while he came
to the conclusion that our attempts at reviving our industries
were not succeeding for want of a bank of our own.  He was, at
the time, trying to teach me political economy.  This alone would
not have done much harm, but he also took it into his head to
teach his countrymen ideas of thrift, so as to pave the way for a
bank; and then he actually started a small bank.  Its high rate
of interest, which made the villagers flock so enthusiastically
to put in their money, ended by swamping the bank altogether.

The old officers of the estate felt troubled and frightened.
There was jubilation in the enemy's camp.  Of all the family,
only my husband's grandmother remained unmoved.  She would scold
me, saying: "Why are you all plaguing him so?  Is it the fate of
the estate that is worrying you?  How many times have I seen this
estate in the hands of the court receiver!  Are men like women?
Men are born spendthrifts and only know how to waste.  Look here,
child, count yourself fortunate that your husband is not wasting
himself as well!"

My husband's list of charities was a long one.  He would assist
to the bitter end of utter failure anyone who wanted to invent a
new loom or rice-husking machine.  But what annoyed me most was
the way that Sandip Babu [9] used to fleece him on the pretext of
__Swadeshi__ work.  Whenever he wanted to start a newspaper,
or travel about preaching the Cause, or take a change of air by
the advice of his doctor, my husband would unquestioningly supply
him with the money.  This was over and above the regular living
allowance which Sandip Babu also received from him.  The
strangest part of it was that my husband and Sandip Babu did not
agree in their opinions.

As soon as the __Swadeshi__ storm reached my blood, I said to
my husband: "I must burn all my foreign clothes."

"Why burn them?"  said he.  "You need not wear them as long as
you please."

"As long as I please!  Not in this life ..."

"Very well, do not wear them for the rest of your life, then.
But why this bonfire business?"

"Would you thwart me in my resolve?"

"What I want to say is this: Why not try to build up something?
You should not waste even a tenth part of your energies in this
destructive excitement."

"Such excitement will give us the energy to build."

"That is as much as to say, that you cannot light the house
unless you set fire to it."

Then there came another trouble.  When Miss Gilby first came to
our house there was a great flutter, which afterwards calmed down
when they got used to her.  Now the whole thing was stirred up
afresh.  I had never bothered myself before as to whether Miss
Gilby was European or Indian, but I began to do so now.  I said
to my husband: "We must get rid of Miss Gilby."

He kept silent.

I talked to him wildly, and he went away sad at heart.

After a fit of weeping, I felt in a more reasonable mood when we
met at night.  "I cannot," my husband said, "look upon Miss Gilby
through a mist of abstraction, just because she is English.
Cannot you get over the barrier of her name after such a long
acquaintance?  Cannot you realize that she loves you?"

I felt a little ashamed and replied with some sharpness: "Let her
remain.  I am not over anxious to send her away."  And Miss Gilby
remained.

But one day I was told that she had been insulted by a young
fellow on her way to church.  This was a boy whom we were
supporting.  My husband turned him out of the house.  There was
not a single soul, that day, who could forgive my husband for
that act--not even I.  This time Miss Gilby left of her own
accord.  She shed tears when she came to say good-bye, but my
mood would not melt.  To slander the poor boy so--and such a fine
boy, too, who would forget his daily bath and food in his
enthusiasm for __Swadeshi__.

My husband escorted Miss Gilby to the railway station in his own
carriage.  I was sure he was going too far.  When exaggerated
accounts of the incident gave rise to a public scandal, which
found its way to the newspapers, I felt he had been rightly
served.

I had often become anxious at my husband's doings, but had never
before been ashamed; yet now I had to blush for him!  I did not
know exactly, nor did I care, what wrong poor Noren might, or
might not, have done to Miss Gilby, but the idea of sitting in
judgement on such a matter at such a time!  I should have refused
to damp the spirit which prompted young Noren to defy the
Englishwoman.  I could not but look upon it as a sign of
cowardice in my husband, that he should fail to understand this
simple thing.  And so I blushed for him.

And yet it was not that my husband refused to support
__Swadeshi__, or was in any way against the Cause.  Only he
had not been able whole-heartedly to accept the spirit of
__Bande Mataram__.  [10]

"I am willing," he said, "to serve my country; but my worship I
reserve for Right which is far greater than my country.  To
worship my country as a god is to bring a curse upon it."

------

8. The Nationalist movement, which began more as an economic than
a political one, having as its main object the encouragement of
indigenous industries [Trans.].

9. "Babu" is a term of respect, like "Father" or "Mister," but
has also meant in colonial days a person who understands some
English.  [on-line ed.]

10. Lit.: "Hail Mother"; the opening words of a song by Bankim
Chatterjee, the famous Bengali novelist.  The song has now become
the national anthem, and __Bande Mataram__ the national cry,
since the days of the __Swadeshi__ movement [Trans.].



Chapter Two

Bimala's Story

IV



THIS was the time when Sandip Babu with his followers came to our
neighbourhood to preach __Swadeshi__.

There is to be a big meeting in our temple pavilion.  We women
are sitting there, on one side, behind a screen.  Triumphant
shouts of __Bande Mataram__ come nearer: and to them I am
thrilling through and through.  Suddenly a stream of barefooted
youths in turbans, clad in ascetic ochre, rushes into the
quadrangle, like a silt-reddened freshet into a dry river-bed at
the first burst of the rains.  The whole place is filled with an
immense crowd, through which Sandip Babu is borne, seated in a
big chair hoisted on the shoulders of ten or twelve of the
youths.

__Bande Mataram!  Bande Mataram!  Bande Mataram__!  It seems
as though the skies would be rent and scattered into a thousand
fragments.

I had seen Sandip Babu's photograph before.  There was something
in his features which I did not quite like.  Not that he was bad-
looking--far from it: he had a splendidly handsome face.  Yet, I
know not why, it seemed to me, in spite of all its brilliance,
that too much of base alloy had gone into its making.  The light
in his eyes somehow did not shine true.  That was why I did not
like it when my husband unquestioningly gave in to all his
demands.  I could bear the waste of money; but it vexed me to
think that he was imposing on my husband, taking advantage of
friendship.  His bearing was not that of an ascetic, nor even of
a person of moderate means, but foppish all over.  Love of
comfort seemed to ...  any number of such reflections come back
to me today, but let them be.

When, however, Sandip Babu began to speak that afternoon, and the
hearts of the crowd swayed and surged to his words, as though
they would break all bounds, I saw him wonderfully transformed.
Especially when his features were suddenly lit up by a shaft of
light from the slowly setting sun, as it sunk below the roof-line
of the pavilion, he seemed to me to be marked out by the gods as
their messenger to mortal men and women.

From beginning to end of his speech, each one of his utterances
was a stormy outburst.  There was no limit to the confidence of
his assurance.  I do not know how it happened, but I found I had
impatiently pushed away the screen from before me and had fixed
my gaze upon him.  Yet there was none in that crowd who paid any
heed to my doings.  Only once, I noticed, his eyes, like stars in
fateful Orion, flashed full on my face.

I was utterly unconscious of myself.  I was no longer the lady of
the Rajah's house, but the sole representative of Bengal's
womanhood.  And he was the champion of Bengal.  As the sky had
shed its light over him, so he must receive the consecration of a
woman's benediction ...

It seemed clear to me that, since he had caught sight of me, the
fire in his words had flamed up more fiercely.  Indra's [11]
steed refused to be reined in, and there came the roar of thunder
and the flash of lightning.  I said within myself that his
language had caught fire from my eyes; for we women are not only
the deities of the household fire, but the flame of the soul
itself.

I returned home that evening radiant with a new pride and joy.
The storm within me had shifted my whole being from one centre to
another.  Like the Greek maidens of old, I fain would cut off my
long, resplendent tresses to make a bowstring for my hero.  Had
my outward ornaments been connected with my inner feelings, then
my necklet, my armlets, my bracelets, would all have burst their
bonds and flung themselves over that assembly like a shower of
meteors.  Only some personal sacrifice, I felt, could help me to
bear the tumult of my exaltation.

When my husband came home later, I was trembling lest he should
utter a sound out of tune with the triumphant paean which was
still ringing in my ears, lest his fanaticism for truth should
lead him to express disapproval of anything that had been said
that afternoon.  For then I should have openly defied and
humiliated him.  But he did not say a word ...  which I did not
like either.

He should have said: "Sandip has brought me to my senses.  I now
realize how mistaken I have been all this time."

I somehow felt that he was spitefully silent, that he obstinately
refused to be enthusiastic.  I asked how long Sandip Babu was
going to be with us.

"He is off to Rangpur early tomorrow morning," said my husband.

"Must it be tomorrow?"

"Yes, he is already engaged to speak there."

I was silent for a while and then asked again: "Could he not
possibly stay a day longer?"

"That may hardly be possible, but why?"

"I want to invite him to dinner and attend on him myself."

My husband was surprised.  He had often entreated me to be
present when he had particular friends to dinner, but I had never
let myself be persuaded.  He gazed at me curiously, in silence,
with a look I did not quite understand.

I was suddenly overcome with a sense of shame.  "No, no," I
exclaimed, "that would never do!"

"Why not!"  said he.  "I will ask him myself, and if it is at all
possible he will surely stay on for tomorrow."

It turned out to be quite possible.

I will tell the exact truth.  That day I reproached my Creator
because he had not made me surpassingly beautiful--not to steal
any heart away, but because beauty is glory.  In this great day
the men of the country should realize its goddess in its
womanhood.  But, alas, the eyes of men fail to discern the
goddess, if outward beauty be lacking.  Would Sandip Babu find
the __Shakti__ of the Motherland manifest in me?  Or would he
simply take me to be an ordinary, domestic woman?

That morning I scented my flowing hair and tied it in a loose
knot, bound by a cunningly intertwined red silk ribbon.  Dinner,
you see, was to be served at midday, and there was no time to dry
my hair after my bath and do it up plaited in the ordinary way.
I put on a gold-bordered white __sari__, and my short-sleeve
muslin jacket was also gold-bordered.

I felt that there was a certain restraint about my costume and
that nothing could well have been simpler.  But my sister-in-law,
who happened to be passing by, stopped dead before me, surveyed
me from head to foot and with compressed lips smiled a meaning
smile.  When I asked her the reason, "I am admiring your get-up!"
she said.

"What is there so entertaining about it?"  I enquired,
considerably annoyed.

"It's superb," she said.  "I was only thinking that one of those
low-necked English bodices would have made it perfect."  Not only
her mouth and eyes, but her whole body seemed to ripple with
suppressed laughter as she left the room.

I was very, very angry, and wanted to change everything and put
on my everyday clothes.  But I cannot tell exactly why I could
not carry out my impulse.  Women are the ornaments of society--
thus I reasoned with myself--and my husband would never like it,
if I appeared before Sandip Babu unworthily clad.

My idea had been to make my appearance after they had sat down to
dinner.  In the bustle of looking after the serving the first
awkwardness would have passed off.  But dinner was not ready in
time, and it was getting late.  Meanwhile my husband had sent for
me to introduce the guest.

I was feeling horribly shy about looking Sandip Babu in the face.
However, I managed to recover myself enough to say: "I am so
sorry dinner is getting late."

He boldly came and sat right beside me as he replied: "I get a
dinner of some kind every day, but the Goddess of Plenty keeps
behind the scenes.  Now that the goddess herself has appeared, it
matters little if the dinner lags behind."

He was just as emphatic in his manners as he was in his public
speaking.  He had no hesitation and seemed to be accustomed to
occupy, unchallenged, his chosen seat.  He claimed the right to
intimacy so confidently, that the blame would seem to belong to
those who should dispute it.

I was in terror lest Sandip Babu should take me for a shrinking,
old-fashioned bundle of inanity.  But, for the life of me, I
could not sparkle in repartees such as might charm or dazzle him.
What could have possessed me, I angrily wondered, to appear
before him in such an absurd way?

I was about to retire when dinner was over, but Sandip Babu, as
bold as ever, placed himself in my way.

"You must not," he said, "think me greedy.  It was not the dinner
that kept me staying on, it was your invitation.  If you were to
run away now, that would not be playing fair with your guest."

If he had not said these words with a careless ease, they would
have been out of tune.  But, after all, he was such a great
friend of my husband that I was like his sister.

While I was struggling to climb up this high wave of intimacy, my
husband came to the rescue, saying: "Why not come back to us
after you have taken your dinner?"

"But you must give your word," said Sandip Babu, "before we let
you off."

"I will come," said I, with a slight smile.

"Let me tell you," continued Sandip Babu, "why I cannot trust
you.  Nikhil has been married these nine years, and all this
while you have eluded me.  If you do this again for another nine
years, we shall never meet again."

I took up the spirit of his remark as I dropped my voice to
reply: "Why even then should we not meet?"

"My horoscope tells me I am to die early.  None of my forefathers
have survived their thirtieth year.  I am now twenty-seven."

He knew this would go home.  This time there must have been a
shade of concern in my low voice as I said: "The blessings of the
whole country are sure to avert the evil influence of the stars."

"Then the blessings of the country must be voiced by its goddess.
This is the reason for my anxiety that you should return, so that
my talisman may begin to work from today."

Sandip Babu had such a way of taking things by storm that I got
no opportunity of resenting what I never should have permitted in
another.

"So," he concluded with a laugh, "I am going to hold this husband
of yours as a hostage till you come back."

As I was coming away, he exclaimed: "May I trouble you for a
trifle?"

I started and turned round.

"Don't be alarmed," he said.  "It's merely a glass of water.  You
might have noticed that I did not drink any water with my dinner.
I take it a little later."

Upon this I had to make a show of interest and ask him the
reason.  He began to give the history of his dyspepsia.  I was
told how he had been a martyr to it for seven months, and how,
after the usual course of nuisances, which included different
allopathic and homoeopathic misadventures, he had obtained the
most wonderful results by indigenous methods.

"Do you know," he added, with a smile, "God has built even my
infirmities in such a manner that they yield only under the
bombardment of __Swadeshi__ pills."

My husband, at this, broke his silence.  "You must confess," said
he, "that you have as immense an attraction for foreign medicine
as the earth has for meteors.  You have three shelves in your
sitting-room full of..."

Sandip Babu broke in: "Do you know what they are?  They are the
punitive police.  They come, not because they are wanted, but
because they are imposed on us by the rule of this modern age,
exacting fines and-inflicting injuries."

My husband could not bear exaggerations, and I could see he
disliked this.  But all ornaments are exaggerations.  They are
not made by God, but by man.  Once I remember in defence of some
untruth of mine I said to my husband: "Only the trees and beasts
and birds tell unmitigated truths, because these poor things have
not the power to invent.  In this men show their superiority to
the lower creatures, and women beat even men.  Neither is a
profusion of ornament unbecoming for a woman, nor a profusion of
untruth."

As I came out into the passage leading to the zenana I found my
sister-in-law, standing near a window overlooking the reception
rooms, peeping through the venetian shutter.

"You here?"  I asked in surprise.

"Eavesdropping!"  she replied.

------

11. The Jupiter Pluvius of Hindu mythology.

V



When I returned, Sandip Babu was tenderly apologetic.  "I am
afraid we have spoilt your appetite," he said.

I felt greatly ashamed.  Indeed, I had been too indecently quick
over my dinner.  With a little calculation, it would become quite
evident that my non-eating had surpassed the eating.  But I had
no idea that anyone could have been deliberately calculating.

I suppose Sandip Babu detected my feeling of shame, which only
augmented it.  "I was sure," he said, "that you had the impulse
of the wild deer to run away, but it is a great boon that you
took the trouble to keep your promise with me."

I could not think of any suitable reply and so I sat down,
blushing and uncomfortable, at one end of the sofa.  The vision
that I had of myself, as the __Shakti__ of Womanhood,
incarnate, crowning Sandip Babu simply with my presence, majestic
and unashamed, failed me altogether.

Sandip Babu deliberately started a discussion with my husband.
He knew that his keen wit flashed to the best effect in an
argument.  I have often since observed, that he never lost an
opportunity for a passage at arms whenever I happened to be
present.

He was familiar with my husband's views on the cult of __Bande
Mataram__, and began in a provoking way: "So you do not allow
that there is room for an appeal to the imagination in patriotic
work?"

"It has its place, Sandip, I admit, but I do not believe in
giving it the whole place.  I would know my country in its frank
reality, and for this I am both afraid and ashamed to make use of
hypnotic texts of patriotism."

"What you call hypnotic texts I call truth.  I truly believe my
country to be my God.  I worship Humanity.  God manifests Himself
both in man and in his country."

"If that is what you really believe, there should be no
difference for you between man and man, and so between country
and country."

"Quite true.  But my powers are limited, so my worship of
Humanity is continued in the worship of my country."

"I have nothing against your worship as such, but how is it you
propose to conduct your worship of God by hating other countries
in which He is equally manifest?"

"Hate is also an adjunct of worship.  Arjuna won Mahadeva's
favour by wrestling with him.  God will be with us in the end, if
we are prepared to give Him battle."

"If that be so, then those who are serving and those who are
harming the country are both His devotees.  Why, then, trouble to
preach patriotism?"

"In the case of one's own country, it is different.  There the
heart clearly demands worship."

"If you push the same argument further you can say that since God
is manifested in us, our __self__ has to be worshipped before
all else; because our natural instinct claims it."

"Look here, Nikhil, this is all merely dry logic.  Can't you
recognize that there is such a thing as feeling?"

"I tell you the truth, Sandip," my husband replied.  "It is my
feelings that are outraged, whenever you try to pass off
injustice as a duty, and unrighteousness as a moral ideal.  The
fact, that I am incapable of stealing, is not due to my
possessing logical faculties, but to my having some feeling of
respect for myself and love for ideals."

I was raging inwardly.  At last I could keep silent no longer.
"Is not the history of every country," I cried, "whether England,
France, Germany, or Russia, the history of stealing for the sake
of one's own country?"

"They have to answer for these thefts; they are doing so even
now; their history is not yet ended."

"At any rate," interposed Sandip Babu, "why should we not follow
suit?  Let us first fill our country's coffers with stolen goods
and then take centuries, like these other countries, to answer
for them, if we must.  But, I ask you, where do you find this
'answering' in history?"

"When Rome was answering for her sin no one knew it.  All that
time, there was apparently no limit to her prosperity.  But do
you not see one thing: how these political bags of theirs are
bursting with lies and treacheries, breaking their backs under
their weight?"

Never before had I had any opportunity of being present at a
discussion between my husband and his men friends.  Whenever he
argued with me I could feel his reluctance to push me into a
corner.  This arose out of the very love he bore me.  Today for
the first time I saw his fencer's skill in debate.

Nevertheless, my heart refused to accept my husband's position.
I was struggling to find some answer, but it would not come.
When the word "righteousness" comes into an argument, it sounds
ugly to say that a thing can be too good to be useful.

All of a sudden Sandip Babu turned to me with the question: "What
do __you__ say to this?"

"I do not care about fine distinctions," I broke out.  "I will
tell you broadly what I feel.  I am only human.  I am covetous.
I would have good things for my country.  If I am obliged, I
would snatch them and filch them.  I have anger.  I would be
angry for my country's sake.  If necessary, I would smite and
slay to avenge her insults.  I have my desire to be fascinated,
and fascination must be supplied to me in bodily shape by my
country.  She must have some visible symbol casting its spell
upon my mind.  I would make my country a Person, and call her
Mother, Goddess, Durga--for whom I would redden the earth with
sacrificial offerings.  I am human, not divine."

Sandip Babu leapt to his feet with uplifted arms and shouted
"Hurrah!"--The next moment he corrected himself and cried:
"__Bande Mataram__."

A shadow of pain passed over the face of my husband.  He said to
me in a very gentle voice: "Neither am I divine: I am human.  And
therefore I dare not permit the evil which is in me to be
exaggerated into an image of my country--never, never!"

Sandip Babu cried out: "See, Nikhil, how in the heart of a woman
Truth takes flesh and blood.  Woman knows how to be cruel: her
virulence is like a blind storm.  It is beautifully fearful.  In
man it is ugly, because it harbours in its centre the gnawing
worms of reason and thought.  I tell you, Nikhil, it is our women
who will save the country.  This is not the time for nice
scruples.  We must be unswervingly, unreasoningly brutal.  We
must sin.  We must give our women red sandal paste with which to
anoint and enthrone our sin.  Don't you remember what the poet
says:

/*
  Come, Sin, O beautiful Sin,
  Let thy stinging red kisses pour down fiery red wine into our
    blood.
  Sound the trumpet of imperious evil
  And cross our forehead with the wreath of exulting lawlessness,
  O Deity of Desecration,
  Smear our breasts with the blackest mud of disrepute,
    unashamed.
*/

Down with that righteousness, which cannot smilingly bring rack
and ruin."

When Sandip Babu, standing with his head high, insulted at a
moment's impulse all that men have cherished as their highest, in
all countries and in all times, a shiver went right through my
body.

But, with a stamp of his foot, he continued his declamation: "I
can see that you are that beautiful spirit of fire, which burns
the home to ashes and lights up the larger world with its flame.
Give to us the indomitable courage to go to the bottom of Ruin
itself.  Impart grace to all that is baneful."

It was not clear to whom Sandip Babu addressed his last appeal.
It might have been She whom he worshipped with his __Bande
Mataram__.  It might have been the Womanhood of his country.
Or it might have been its representative, the woman before him.
He would have gone further in the same strain, but my husband
suddenly rose from his seat and touched him lightly on the
shoulder saying: "Sandip, Chandranath Babu is here."

I started and turned round, to find an aged gentleman at the
door, calm and dignified, in doubt as to whether he should come
in or retire.  His face was touched with a gentle light like that
of the setting sun.

My husband came up to me and whispered: "This is my master, of
whom I have so often told you.  Make your obeisance to him."

I bent reverently and took the dust of his feet.  He gave me his
blessing saying: "May God protect you always, my little mother."
I was sorely in need of such a blessing at that moment.



Nikhil's Story

I



One day I had the faith to believe that I should be able to bear
whatever came from my God.  I never had the trial.  Now I think
it has come.

I used to test my strength of mind by imagining all kinds of evil
which might happen to me--poverty, imprisonment, dishonour,
death--even Bimala's.  And when I said to myself that I should be
able to receive these with firmness, I am sure I did not
exaggerate.  Only I could never even imagine one thing, and today
it is that of which I am thinking, and wondering whether I can
really bear it.  There is a thorn somewhere pricking in my heart,
constantly giving me pain while I am about my daily work.  It
seems to persist even when I am asleep.  The very moment I wake
up in the morning, I find that the bloom has gone from the face
of the sky.  What is it?  What has happened?

My mind has become so sensitive, that even my past life, which
came to me in the disguise of happiness, seems to wring my very
heart with its falsehood; and the shame and sorrow which are
coming close to me are losing their cover of privacy, all the
more because they try to veil their faces.  My heart has become
all eyes.  The things that should not be seen, the things I do
not want to see--these I must see.

The day has come at last when my ill-starred life has to reveal
its destitution in a long-drawn series of exposures.  This
penury, all unexpected, has taken its seat in the heart where
plenitude seemed to reign.  The fees which I paid to delusion for
just nine years of my youth have now to be returned with interest
to Truth till the end of my days.

What is the use of straining to keep up my pride?  What harm if I
confess that I have something lacking in me?  Possibly it is that
unreasoning forcefulness which women love to find in men.  But is
strength mere display of muscularity?  Must strength have no
scruples in treading the weak underfoot?

But why all these arguments?  Worthiness cannot be earned merely
by disputing about it.  And I am unworthy, unworthy, unworthy.

What if I am unworthy?  The true value of love is this, that it
can ever bless the unworthy with its own prodigality.  For the
worthy there are many rewards on God's earth, but God has
specially reserved love for the unworthy.

Up till now Bimala was my home-made Bimala, the product of the
confined space and the daily routine of small duties.  Did the
love which I received from her, I asked myself, come from the
deep spring of her heart, or was it merely like the daily
provision of pipe water pumped up by the municipal steam-engine
of society?

I longed to find Bimala blossoming fully in all her truth and
power.  But the thing I forgot to calculate was, that one must
give up all claims based on conventional rights, if one would
find a person freely revealed in truth.

Why did I fail to think of this?  Was it because of the husband's
pride of possession over his wife?  No.  It was because I placed
the fullest trust upon love.  I was vain enough to think that I
had the power in me to bear the sight of truth in its awful
nakedness.  It was tempting Providence, but still I clung to my
proud determination to come out victorious in the trial.

Bimala had failed to understand me in one thing.  She could not
fully realize that I held as weakness all imposition of force.
Only the weak dare not be just.  They shirk their responsibility
of fairness and try quickly to get at results through the short-
cuts of injustice.  Bimala has no patience with patience.  She
loves to find in men the turbulent, the angry, the unjust.  Her
respect must have its element of fear.

I had hoped that when Bimala found herself free in the outer
world she would be rescued from her infatuation for tyranny.  But
now I feel sure that this infatuation is deep down in her nature.
Her love is for the boisterous.  From the tip of her tongue to
the pit of her stomach she must tingle with red pepper in order
to enjoy the simple fare of life.  But my determination was,
never to do my duty with frantic impetuosity, helped on by the
fiery liquor of excitement.  I know Bimala finds it difficult to
respect me for this, taking my scruples for feebleness--and she
is quite angry with me because I am not running amuck crying
__Bande Mataram__.

For the matter of that, I have become unpopular with all my
countrymen because I have not joined them in their carousals.
They are certain that either I have a longing for some title, or
else that I am afraid of the police.  The police on their side
suspect me of harbouring some hidden design and protesting too
much in my mildness.

What I really feel is this, that those who cannot find food for
their enthusiasm in a knowledge of their country as it actually
is, or those who cannot love men just because they are men--who
needs must shout and deify their country in order to keep up
their excitement--these love excitement more than their country.

To try to give our infatuation a higher place than Truth is a
sign of inherent slavishness.  Where our minds are free we find
ourselves lost.  Our moribund vitality must have for its rider
either some fantasy, or someone in authority, or a sanction from
the pundits, in order to make it move.  So long as we are
impervious to truth and have to be moved by some hypnotic
stimulus, we must know that we lack the capacity for self-
government.  Whatever may be our condition, we shall either need
some imaginary ghost or some actual medicine-man to terrorize
over us.

The other day when Sandip accused me of lack of imagination,
saying that this prevented me from realizing my country in a
visible image, Bimala agreed with him.  I did not say anything in
my defence, because to win in argument does not lead to
happiness.  Her difference of opinion is not due to any
inequality of intelligence, but rather to dissimilarity of
nature.

They accuse me of being unimaginative--that is, according to
them, I may have oil in my lamp, but no flame.  Now this is
exactly the accusation which I bring against them.  I would say
to them: "You are dark, even as the flints are.  You must come to
violent conflicts and make a noise in order to produce your
sparks.  But their disconnected flashes merely assist your pride,
and not your clear vision."

I have been noticing for some time that there is a gross cupidity
about Sandip.  His fleshly feelings make him harbour delusions
about his religion and impel him into a tyrannical attitude in
his patriotism.  His intellect is keen, but his nature is coarse,
and so he glorifies his selfish lusts under high-sounding names.
The cheap consolations of hatred are as urgently necessary for
him as the satisfaction of his appetites.  Bimala has often
warned me, in the old days, of his hankering after money.  I
understood this, but I could not bring myself to haggle with
Sandip.  I felt ashamed even to own to myself that he was trying
to take advantage of me.

It will, however, be difficult to explain to Bimala today that
Sandip's love of country is but a different phase of his covetous
self-love.  Bimala's hero-worship of Sandip makes me hesitate all
the more to talk to her about him, lest some touch of jealousy
may lead me unwittingly into exaggeration.  It may be that the
pain at my heart is already making me see a distorted picture of
Sandip.  And yet it is better perhaps to speak out than to keep
my feelings gnawing within me.

II



I have known my master these thirty years.  Neither calumny, nor
disaster, nor death itself has any terrors for him.  Nothing
could have saved me, born as I was into the traditions of this
family of ours, but that he has established his own life in the
centre of mine, with its peace and truth and spiritual vision,
thus making it possible for me to realize goodness in its truth.

My master came to me that day and said: "Is it necessary to
detain Sandip here any longer?"

His nature was so sensitive to all omens of evil that he had at
once understood.  He was not easily moved, but that day he felt
the dark shadow of trouble ahead.  Do I not know how well he
loves me?

At tea-time I said to Sandip: "I have just had a letter from
Rangpur.  They are complaining that I am selfishly detaining you.
When will you be going there?"

Bimala was pouring out the tea.  Her face fell at once.  She
threw just one enquiring glance at Sandip.

"I have been thinking," said Sandip, "that this wandering up and
down means a tremendous waste of energy.  I feel that if I could
work from a centre I could achieve more permanent results."

With this he looked up at Bimala and asked: "Do you not think so
too?"

Bimala hesitated for a reply and then said: "Both ways seem good
--to do the work from a centre, as well as by travelling about.
That in which you find greater satisfaction is the way for you."

"Then let me speak out my mind," said Sandip.  "I have never yet
found any one source of inspiration suffice me for good.  That is
why I have been constantly moving about, rousing enthusiasm in
the people, from which in turn I draw my own store of energy.
Today you have given me the message of my country.  Such fire I
have never beheld in any man.  I shall be able to spread the fire
of enthusiasm in my country by borrowing it from you.  No, do not
be ashamed.  You are far above all modesty and diffidence.  You
are the Queen Bee of our hive, and we the workers shall rally
around you.  You shall be our centre, our inspiration."

Bimala flushed all over with bashful pride and her hand shook as
she went on pouring out the tea.

Another day my master came to me and said: "Why don't you two go
up to Darjeeling for a change?  You are not looking well.  Have
you been getting enough sleep?"

I asked Bimala in the evening whether she would care to have a
trip to the Hills.  I knew she had a great longing to see the
Himalayas.  But she refused ...  The country's Cause, I suppose!

I must not lose my faith: I shall wait.  The passage from the
narrow to the larger world is stormy.  When she is familiar with
this freedom, then I shall know where my place is.  If I discover
that I do not fit in with the arrangement of the outer world,
then I shall not quarrel with my fate, but silently take my leave
...  Use force?  But for what?  Can force prevail against Truth?



Sandip's Story

I



The impotent man says: "That which has come to my share is mine."
And the weak man assents.  But the lesson of the whole world is:
"That is really mine which I can snatch away."  My country does
not become mine simply because it is the country of my birth.  It
becomes mine on the day when I am able to win it by force.

Every man has a natural right to possess, and therefore greed is
natural.  It is not in the wisdom of nature that we should be
content to be deprived.  What my mind covets, my surroundings
must supply.  This is the only true understanding between our
inner and outer nature in this world.  Let moral ideals remain
merely for those poor anaemic creatures of starved desire whose
grasp is weak.  Those who can desire with all their soul and
enjoy with all their heart, those who have no hesitation or
scruple, it is they who are the anointed of Providence.  Nature
spreads out her riches and loveliest treasures for their benefit.
They swim across streams, leap over walls, kick open doors, to
help themselves to whatever is worth taking.  In such a getting
one can rejoice; such wresting as this gives value to the thing
taken.

Nature surrenders herself, but only to the robber.  For she
delights in this forceful desire, this forceful abduction.  And
so she does not put the garland of her acceptance round the lean,
scraggy neck of the ascetic.  The music of the wedding march is
struck.  The time of the wedding I must not let pass.  My heart
therefore is eager.  For, who is the bridegroom?  It is I.  The
bridegroom's place belongs to him who, torch in hand, can come in
time.  The bridegroom in Nature's wedding hall comes unexpected
and uninvited.

Ashamed?  No, I am never ashamed!  I ask for whatever I want, and
I do not always wait to ask before I take it.  Those who are
deprived by their own diffidence dignify their privation by the
name of modesty.  The world into which we are born is the world
of reality.  When a man goes away from the market of real things
with empty hands and empty stomach, merely filling his bag with
big sounding words, I wonder why he ever came into this hard
world at all.  Did these men get their appointment from the
epicures of the religious world, to play set tunes on sweet,
pious texts in that pleasure garden where blossom airy nothings?
I neither affect those tunes nor do I find any sustenance in
those blossoms.

What I desire, I desire positively, superlatively.  I want to
knead it with both my hands and both my feet; I want to smear it
all over my body; I want to gorge myself with it to the full.
The scrannel pipes of those who have worn themselves out by their
moral fastings, till they have become flat and pale like starved
vermin infesting a long-deserted bed, will never reach my ear.

I would conceal nothing, because that would be cowardly.  But if
I cannot bring myself to conceal when concealment is needful,
that also is cowardly.  Because you have your greed, you build
your walls.  Because I have my greed, I break through them.  You
use your power: I use my craft.  These are the realities of life.
On these depend kingdoms and empires and all the great
enterprises of men.

As for those __avatars__ who come down from their paradise to
talk to us in some holy jargon--their words are not real.
Therefore, in spite of all the applause they get, these sayings
of theirs only find a place in the hiding corners of the weak.

They are despised by those who are strong, the rulers of the
world.  Those who have had the courage to see this have won
success, while those poor wretches who are dragged one way by
nature and the other way by these ava tars, they set one foot in
the boat of the real and the other in the boat of the unreal, and
thus are in a pitiable plight, able neither to advance nor to
keep their place.

There are many men who seem to have been born only with an
obsession to die.  Possibly there is a beauty, like that of a
sunset, in this lingering death in life which seems to fascinate
them.  Nikhil lives this kind of life, if life it may be called.
Years ago, I had a great argument with him on this point.

"It is true," he said, "that you cannot get anything except by
force.  But then what is this force?  And then also, what is this
getting?  The strength I believe in is the strength of
renouncing."

"So you," I exclaimed, "are infatuated with the glory of
bankruptcy."

"Just as desperately as the chick is infatuated about the
bankruptcy of its shell," he replied.  "The shell is real enough,
yet it is given up in exchange for intangible light and air.  A
sorry exchange, I suppose you would call it?"

When once Nikhil gets on to metaphor, there is no hope of making
him see that he is merely dealing with words, not with realities.
Well, well, let him be happy with his metaphors.  We are the
flesh-eaters of the world; we have teeth and nails; we pursue and
grab and tear.  We are not satisfied with chewing in the evening
the cud of the grass we have eaten in the morning.  Anyhow, we
cannot allow your metaphor-mongers to bar the door to our
sustenance.  In that case we shall simply steal or rob, for we
must live.

People will say that I am starting some novel theory just because
those who are moving in this world are in the habit of talking
differently though they are really acting up to it all the time.
Therefore they fail to understand, as I do, that this is the only
working moral principle.  In point of fact, I know that my idea
is not an empty theory at all, for it has been proved in
practical life.  I have found that my way always wins over the
hearts of women, who are creatures of this world of reality and
do not roam about in cloud-land, as men do, in idea-filled
balloons.

Women find in my features, my manner, my gait, my speech, a
masterful passion--not a passion dried thin with the heat of
asceticism, not a passion with its face turned back at every step
in doubt and debate, but a full-blooded passion.  It roars and
rolls on, like a flood, with the cry: "I want, I want, I want."
Women feel, in their own heart of hearts, that this indomitable
passion is the lifeblood of the world, acknowledging no law but
itself, and therefore victorious.  For this reason they have so
often abandoned themselves to be swept away on the flood-tide of
my passion, recking naught as to whether it takes them to life or
to death.  This power which wins these women is the power of
mighty men, the power which wins the world of reality.

Those who imagine the greater desirability of another world
merely shift their desires from the earth to the skies.  It
remains to be seen how high their gushing fountain will play, and
for how long.  But this much is certain: women were not created
for these pale creatures--these lotus-eaters of idealism.

"Affinity!"  When it suited my need, I have often said that God
has created special pairs of men and women, and that the union of
such is the only legitimate union, higher than all unions made by
law.  The reason of it is, that though man wants to follow
nature, he can find no pleasure in it unless he screens himself
with some phrase--and that is why this world is so overflowing
with lies.

"Affinity!"  Why should there be only one?  There may be affinity
with thousands.  It was never in my agreement with nature that I
should overlook all my innumerable affinities for the sake of
only one.  I have discovered many in my own life up to now, yet
that has not closed the door to one more--and that one is clearly
visible to my eyes.  She has also discovered her own affinity to
me.

And then?

Then, if I do not win I am a coward.



Chapter Three

Bimala's Story

VI



I WONDER what could have happened to my feeling of shame.  The
fact is, I had no time to think about myself.  My days and nights
were passing in a whirl, like an eddy with myself in the centre.
No gap was left for hesitation or delicacy to enter.

One day my sister-in-law remarked to my husband: "Up to now the
women of this house have been kept weeping.  Here comes the men's
turn.

"We must see that they do not miss it," she continued, turning to
me.  "I see you are out for the fray, Chota [12] Rani!  Hurl your
shafts straight at their hearts."

Her keen eyes looked me up and down.  Not one of the colours into
which my toilet, my dress, my manners, my speech, had blossomed
out had escaped her.  I am ashamed to speak of it today, but I
felt no shame then.  Something within me was at work of which I
was not even conscious.  I used to overdress, it is true, but
more like an automaton, with no particular design.  No doubt I
knew which effort of mine would prove specially pleasing to
Sandip Babu, but that required no intuition, for he would discuss
it openly before all of them.

One day he said to my husband: "Do you know, Nikhil, when I first
saw our Queen Bee, she was sitting there so demurely in her gold-
bordered __sari__.  Her eyes were gazing inquiringly into
space, like stars which had lost their way, just as if she had
been for ages standing on the edge of some darkness, looking out
for something unknown.  But when I saw her, I felt a quiver run
through me.  It seemed to me that the gold border of her
__sari__ was her own inner fire flaming out and twining round
her.  That is the flame we want, visible fire!  Look here, Queen
Bee, you really must do us the favour of dressing once more as a
living flame."

So long I had been like a small river at the border of a village.
My rhythm and my language were different from what they are now.
But the tide came up from the sea, and my breast heaved; my banks
gave way and the great drumbeats of the sea waves echoed in my
mad current.  I could not understand the meaning of that sound in
my blood.  Where was that former self of mine?  Whence came
foaming into me this surging flood of glory?  Sandip's hungry
eyes burnt like the lamps of worship before my shrine.  All his
gaze proclaimed that I was a wonder in beauty and power; and the
loudness of his praise, spoken and unspoken, drowned all other
voices in my world.  Had the Creator created me afresh, I
wondered?  Did he wish to make up now for neglecting me so long?
I who before was plain had become suddenly beautiful.  I who
before had been of no account now felt in myself all the
splendour of Bengal itself.

For Sandip Babu was not a mere individual.  In him was the
confluence of millions of minds of the country.  When he called
me the Queen Bee of the hive, I was acclaimed with a chorus of
praise by all our patriot workers.  After that, the loud jests of
my sister-in-law could not touch me any longer.  My relations
with all the world underwent a change.  Sandip Babu made it clear
how all the country was in need of me.  I had no difficulty in
believing this at the time, for I felt that I had the power to do
everything.  Divine strength had come to me.  It was something
which I had never felt before, which was beyond myself.  I had no
time to question it to find out what was its nature.  It seemed
to belong to me, and yet to transcend me.  It comprehended the
whole of Bengal.

Sandip Babu would consult me about every little thing touching
the Cause.  At first I felt very awkward and would hang back, but
that soon wore off.  Whatever I suggested seemed to astonish him.
He would go into raptures and say: "Men can only think.  You
women have a way of understanding without thinking.  Woman was
created out of God's own fancy.  Man, He had to hammer into
shape."

Letters used to come to Sandip Babu from all parts of the country
which were submitted to me for my opinion.  Occasionally he
disagreed with me.  But I would not argue with him.  Then after a
day or two--as if a new light had suddenly dawned upon him--he
would send for me and say: "It was my mistake.  Your suggestion
was the correct one."  He would often confess to me that wherever
he had taken steps contrary to my advice he had gone wrong.  Thus
I gradually came to be convinced that behind whatever was taking
place was Sandip Babu, and behind Sandip Babu was the plain
common sense of a woman.  The glory of a great responsibility
filled my being.

My husband had no place in our counsels.  Sandip Babu treated him
as a younger brother, of whom personally one may be very fond and
yet have no use for his business advice.  He would tenderly and
smilingly talk about my husband's childlike innocence, saying
that his curious doctrine and perversities of mind had a flavour
of humour which made them all the more lovable.  It was seemingly
this very affection for Nikhil which led Sandip Babu to forbear
from troubling him with the burden of the country.

Nature has many anodynes in her pharmacy, which she secretly
administers when vital relations are being insidiously severed,
so that none may know of the operation, till at last one awakes
to know what a great rent has been made.  When the knife was busy
with my life's most intimate tie, my mind was so clouded with
fumes of intoxicating gas that I was not in the least aware of
what a cruel thing was happening.  Possibly this is woman's
nature.  When her passion is roused she loses her sensibility for
all that is outside it.  When, like the river, we women keep to
our banks, we give nourishment with all that we have: when we
overflow them we destroy with all that we are.

------

12. Bimala.  the younger brother's wife, was the __Chota__ or
Junior Rani.



Sandip's Story

II



I can see that something has gone wrong.  I got an inkling of it
the other day.

Ever since my arrival, Nikhil's sitting-room had become a thing
amphibious--half women's apartment, half men's: Bimala had access
to it from the zenana, it was not barred to me from the outer
side.  If we had only gone slow, and made use of our privileges
with some restraint, we might not have fallen foul of other
people.  But we went ahead so vehemently that we could not think
of the consequences.

Whenever Bee comes into Nikhil's room, I somehow get to know of
it from mine.  There are the tinkle of bangles and other little
sounds; the door is perhaps shut with a shade of unnecessary
vehemence; the bookcase is a trifle stiff and creaks if jerked
open.  When I enter I find Bee, with her back to the door, ever
so busy selecting a book from the shelves.  And as I offer to
assist her in this difficult task she starts and protests; and
then we naturally get on to other topics.

The other day, on an inauspicious [13] Thursday afternoon, I
sallied forth from my room at the call of these same sounds.
There was a man on guard in the passage.  I walked on without so
much as glancing at him, but as I approached the door he put
himself in my way saying: "Not that way, sir."

"Not that way!  Why?"

"The Rani Mother is there."

"Oh, very well.  Tell your Rani Mother that Sandip Babu wants to
see her."

"That cannot be, sir.  It is against orders."

I felt highly indignant.  "I order you!"  I said in a raised
voice.

"Go and announce me."

The fellow was somewhat taken aback at my attitude.  In the
meantime I had neared the door.  I was on the point of reaching
it, when he followed after me and took me by the arm saying: "No,
sir, you must not."

What!  To be touched by a flunkey!  I snatched away my arm and
gave the man a sounding blow.  At this moment Bee came out of the
room to find the man about to insult me.

I shall never forget the picture of her wrath!  That Bee is
beautiful is a discovery of my own.  Most of our people would see
nothing in her.  Her tall, slim figure these boors would call
"lanky".  But it is just this lithesomeness of hers that I
admire--like an up-leaping fountain of life, coming direct out of
the depths of the Creator's heart.  Her complexion is dark, but
it is the lustrous darkness of a sword-blade, keen and
scintillating.

"Nanku!"  she commanded, as she stood in the doorway, pointing
with her finger, "leave us."

"Do not be angry with him," said I.  "If it is against orders, it
is I who should retire."

Bee's voice was still trembling as she replied: "You must not go.
Come in."

It was not a request, but again a command!  I followed her in,
and taking a chair fanned myself with a fan which was on the
table.  Bee scribbled something with a pencil on a sheet of paper
and, summoning a servant, handed it to him saying: "Take this to
the Maharaja."

"Forgive me," I resumed.  "I was unable to control myself, and
hit that man of yours.

"You served him right," said Bee.

"But it was not the poor fellow's fault, after all.  He was only
obeying his orders."

Here Nikhil came in, and as he did so I left my seat with a rapid
movement and went and stood near the window with my back to the
room.

"Nanku, the guard, has insulted Sandip Babu," said Bee to Nikhil.

Nikhil seemed to be so genuinely surprised that I had to turn
round and stare at him.  Even an outrageously good man fails in
keeping up his pride of truthfulness before his wife--if she be
the proper kind of woman.

"He insolently stood in the way when Sandip Babu was coming in
here," continued Bee.  "He said he had orders ..."

"Whose orders?"  asked Nikhil.

"How am I to know?"  exclaimed Bee impatiently, her eyes brimming
over with mortification.

Nikhil sent for the man and questioned him.  "It was not my
fault," Nanku repeated sullenly.  "I had my orders."

"Who gave you the order?"

"The Bara Rani Mother."

We were all silent for a while.  After the man had left, Bee
said: "Nanku must go!"

Nikhil remained silent.  I could see that his sense of justice
would not allow this.  There was no end to his qualms.  But this
time he was up against a tough problem.  Bee was not the woman to
take things lying down.  She would have to get even with her
sister-in-law by punishing this fellow.  And as Nikhil remained
silent, her eyes flashed fire.  She knew not how to pour her
scorn upon her husband's feebleness of spirit.  Nikhil left the
room after a while without another word.

The next day Nanku was not to be seen.  On inquiry, I learnt that
he had been sent off to some other part of the estates, and that
his wages had not suffered by such transfer.

I could catch glimpses of the ravages of the storm raging over
this, behind the scenes.  All I can say is, that Nikhil is a
curious creature, quite out of the common.

The upshot was, that after this Bee began to send for me to the
sitting-room, for a chat, without any contrivance, or pretence of
its being an accident.  Thus from bare suggestion we came to
broad hint: the implied came to be expressed.  The daughter-in-
law of a princely house lives in a starry region so remote from
the ordinary outsider that there is not even a regular road for
his approach.  What a triumphal progress of Truth was this which,
gradually but persistently, thrust aside veil after veil of
obscuring custom, till at length Nature herself was laid bare.

Truth?  Of course it was the truth!  The attraction of man and
woman for each other is fundamental.  The whole world of matter,
from the speck of dust upwards, is ranged on its side.  And yet
men would keep it hidden away out of sight, behind a tissue of
words; and with home-made sanctions and prohibitions make of it a
domestic utensil.  Why, it's as absurd as melting down the solar
system to make a watch-chain for one's son-in-law!  [14]

When, in spite of all, reality awakes at the call of what is but
naked truth, what a gnashing of teeth and beating of breasts is
there!  But can one carry on a quarrel with a storm?  It never
takes the trouble to reply, it only gives a shaking.

I am enjoying the sight of this truth, as it gradually reveals
itself.  These tremblings of steps, these turnings of the face,
are sweet to me: and sweet are the deceptions which deceive not
only others, but also Bee herself.  When Reality has to meet the
unreal, deception is its principal weapon; for its enemies always
try to shame Reality by calling it gross, and so it needs must
hide itself, or else put on some disguise.  The circumstances are
such that it dare not frankly avow: "Yes, I am gross, because I
am true.  I am flesh.  I am passion.  I am hunger, unashamed and
cruel."

All is now clear to me.  The curtain flaps, and through it I can
see the preparations for the catastrophe.  The little red ribbon,
which peeps through the luxuriant masses of her hair, with its
flush of secret longing, it is the lolling tongue of the red
storm cloud.  I feel the warmth of each turn of her __sari__,
each suggestion of her raiment, of which even the wearer may not
be fully conscious.

Bee was not conscious, because she was ashamed of the reality; to
which men have given a bad name, calling it Satan; and so it has
to steal into the garden of paradise in the guise of a snake, and
whisper secrets into the ears of man's chosen consort and make
her rebellious; then farewell to all ease; and after that comes
death!

My poor little Queen Bee is living in a dream.  She knows not
which way she is treading.  It would not be safe to awaken her
before the time.  It is best for me to pretend to be equally
unconscious.

The other day, at dinner, she was gazing at me in a curious sort
of way, little realizing what such glances mean!  As my eyes met
hers, she turned away with a flush.  "You are surprised at my
appetite," I remarked.  "I can hide everything, except that I am
greedy!  Anyhow, why trouble to blush for me, since I am
shameless?"

This only made her colour more furiously, as she stammered: "No,
no, I was only..."

"I know," I interrupted.  "Women have a weakness for greedy men;
for it is this greed of ours which gives them the upper hand.
The indulgence which I have always received at their hands has
made me all the more shameless.  I do not mind your watching the
good things disappear, not one bit.  I mean to enjoy every one of
them."

The other day I was reading an English book in which sex-problems
were treated in an audaciously realistic manner.  I had left it
lying in the sitting-room.  As I went there the next afternoon,
for something or other, I found Bee seated with this book in her
hand.  When she heard my footsteps she hurriedly put it down and
placed another book over it--a volume of Mrs Hemans's poems.

"I have never been able to make out," I began, "why women are so
shy about being caught reading poetry.  We men--lawyers,
mechanics, or what not--may well feel ashamed.  If we must read
poetry, it should be at dead of night, within closed doors.  But
you women are so akin to poesy.  The Creator Himself is a lyric
poet, and Jayadeva [15] must have practised the divine art seated
at His feet."

Bee made no reply, but only blushed uncomfortably.  She made as
if she would leave the room.  Whereupon I protested: "No, no,
pray read on.  I will just take a book I left here, and run
away."  With which I took up my book from the table.  "Lucky you
did not think of glancing over its pages," I continued, "or you
would have wanted to chastise me."

"Indeed!  Why?"  asked Bee.

"Because it is not poetry," said I.  "Only blunt things, bluntly
put, without any finicking niceness.  I wish Nikhil would read
it."

Bee frowned a little as she murmured: "What makes you wish that?"

"He is a man, you see, one of us.  My only quarrel with him is
that he delights in a misty vision of this world.  Have you not
observed how this trait of his makes him look on __Swadeshi__
as if it was some poem of which the metre must be kept correct at
every step?  We, with the clubs of our prose, are the iconoclasts
of metre."

"What has your book to do with __Swadeshi__?"

"You would know if you only read it.  Nikhil wants to go by made-
up maxims, in __Swadeshi__ as in everything else; so he knocks
up against human nature at every turn, and then falls to abusing
it.  He never will realize that human nature was created long
before phrases were, and will survive them too."

Bee was silent for a while and then gravely said: "Is it not a
part of human nature to try and rise superior to itself?"

I smiled inwardly.  "These are not your words", I thought to
myself.  "You have learnt them from Nikhil.  You are a healthy
human being.  Your flesh and blood have responded to the call of
reality.  You are burning in every vein with life-fire--do I not
know it?  How long should they keep you cool with the wet towel
of moral precepts?"

"The weak are in the majority," I said aloud.  "They are
continually poisoning the ears of men by repeating these
shibboleths.  Nature has denied them strength--it is thus that
they try to enfeeble others."

"We women are weak," replied Bimala.  "So I suppose we must join
in the conspiracy of the weak."

"Women weak!"  I exclaimed with a laugh.  "Men belaud you as
delicate and fragile, so as to delude you into thinking
yourselves weak.  But it is you women who are strong.  Men make a
great outward show of their so-called freedom, but those who know
their inner minds are aware of their bondage.  They have
manufactured scriptures with their own hands to bind themselves;
with their very idealism they have made golden fetters of women
to wind round their body and mind.  If men had not that
extraordinary faculty of entangling themselves in meshes of their
own contriving, nothing could have kept them bound.  But as for
you women, you have desired to conceive reality with body and
soul.  You have given birth to reality.  You have suckled reality
at your breasts."

Bee was well read for a woman, and would not easily give in to my
arguments.  "If that were true," she objected, "men would not
have found women attractive."

"Women realize the danger," I replied.  "They know that men love
delusions, so they give them full measure by borrowing their own
phrases.  They know that man, the drunkard, values intoxication
more than food, and so they try to pass themselves off as an
intoxicant.  As a matter of fact, but for the sake of man, woman
has no need for any make-believe."

"Why, then, are you troubling to destroy the illusion?"

"For freedom.  I want the country to be free.  I want human
relations to be free."

------

13. According to the Hindu calendar [Trans.].

14. The son-in-law is the pet of a Hindu household.

15. A Vaishnava poet (Sanskrit) whose lyrics of the adoration of
the Divinity serve as well to express all shades of human passion
[Trans.].

III



I was aware that it is unsafe suddenly to awake a sleep-walker.
But I am so impetuous by nature, a halting gait does not suit me.
I knew I was overbold that day.  I knew that the first shock of
such ideas is apt to be almost intolerable.  But with women it is
always audacity that wins.

Just as we were getting on nicely, who should walk in but
Nikhil's old tutor Chandranath Babu.  The world would have been
not half a bad place to live in but for these schoolmasters, who
make one want to quit in disgust.  The Nikhil type wants to keep
the world always a school.  This incarnation of a school turned
up that afternoon at the psychological moment.

We all remain schoolboys in some corner of our hearts, and I,
even I, felt somewhat pulled up.  As for poor Bee, she at once
took her place solemnly, like the topmost girl of the class on
the front bench.  All of a sudden she seemed to remember that she
had to face her examination.

Some people are so like eternal pointsmen lying in wait by the
line, to shunt one's train of thought from one rail to another.

Chandranath Babu had no sooner come in than he cast about for
some excuse to retire, mumbling: "I beg your pardon, I..."

Before he could finish, Bee went up to him and made a profound
obeisance, saying: "Pray do not leave us, sir.  Will you not take
a seat?"  She looked like a drowning person clutching at him for
support--the little coward!

But possibly I was mistaken.  It is quite likely that there was a
touch of womanly wile in it.  She wanted, perhaps, to raise her
value in my eyes.  She might have been pointedly saying to me:
"Please don't imagine for a moment that I am entirely overcome by
you.  My respect for Chandranath Babu is even greater."

Well, indulge in your respect by all means!  Schoolmasters thrive
on it.  But not being one of them, I have no use for that empty
compliment.

Chandranath Babu began to talk about __Swadeshi__.  I thought
I would let him go on with his monologues.  There is nothing like
letting an old man talk himself out.  It makes him feel that he
is winding up the world, forgetting all the while how far away
the real world is from his wagging tongue.

But even my worst enemy would not accuse me of patience.  And
when Chandranath Babu went on to say: "If we expect to gather
fruit where we have sown no seed, then we ..."  I had to
interrupt him.

"Who wants fruit?"  I cried.  "We go by the Author of the Gita
who says that we are concerned only with the doing, not with the
fruit of our deeds."

"What is it then that you do want?"  asked Chandranath Babu.

"Thorns!"  I exclaimed, "which cost nothing to plant."

"Thorns do not obstruct others only," he replied.  "They have a
way of hurting one's own feet."

"That is all right for a copy-book," I retorted.  "But the real
thing is that we have this burning at heart.  Now we have only to
cultivate thorns for other's soles; afterwards when they hurt us
we shall find leisure to repent.  But why be frightened even of
that?  When at last we have to die it will be time enough to get
cold.  While we are on fire let us seethe and boil."

Chandranath Babu smiled.  "Seethe by all means," he said, "but do
not mistake it for work, or heroism.  Nations which have got on
in the world have done so by action, not by ebullition.  Those
who have always lain in dread of work, when with a start they
awake to their sorry plight, they look to short-cuts and scamping
for their deliverance."

I was girding up my loins to deliver a crushing reply, when
Nikhil came back.  Chandranath Babu rose, and looking towards
Bee, said: "Let me go now, my little mother, I have some work to
attend to."

As he left, I showed Nikhil the book in my hand.  "I was telling
Queen Bee about this book," I said.

Ninety-nine per cent of people have to be deluded with lies, but
it is easier to delude this perpetual pupil of the schoolmaster
with the truth.  He is best cheated openly.  So, in playing with
him, the simplest course was to lay my cards on the table.

Nikhil read the title on the cover, but said nothing.  "These
writers," I continued, "are busy with their brooms, sweeping away
the dust of epithets with which men have covered up this world of
ours.  So, as I was saying, I wish you would read it."

"I have read it," said Nikhil.

"Well, what do you say?"

"It is all very well for those who really care to think, but
poison for those who shirk thought."

"What do you mean?"

"Those who preach 'Equal Rights of Property' should not be
thieves.  For, if they are, they would be preaching lies.  When
passion is in the ascendant, this kind of book is not rightly
understood."

"Passion," I replied, "is the street lamp which guides us.  To
call it untrue is as hopeless as to expect to see better by
plucking out our natural eyes."

Nikhil was visibly growing excited.  "I accept the truth of
passion," he said, "only when I recognize the truth of restraint.
By pressing what we want to see right into our eyes we only
injure them: we do not see.  So does the violence of passion,
which would leave no space between the mind and its object,
defeat its purpose."

"It is simply your intellectual foppery," I replied, "which makes
you indulge in moral delicacy, ignoring the savage side of truth.
This merely helps you to mystify things, and so you fail to do
your work with any degree of strength."

"The intrusion of strength," said Nikhil impatiently, "where
strength is out of place, does not help you in your work ...  But
why are we arguing about these things?  Vain arguments only brush
off the fresh bloom of truth."

I wanted Bee to join in the discussion, but she had not said a
word up to now.  Could I have given her too rude a shock, leaving
her assailed with doubts and wanting to learn her lesson afresh
from the schoolmaster?  Still, a thorough shaking-up is
essential.  One must begin by realizing that things supposed to
be unshakeable can be shaken.

"I am glad I had this talk with you," I said to Nikhil, "for I
was on the point of lending this book to Queen Bee to read."

"What harm?"  said Nikhil.  "If I could read the book, why not
Bimala too?  All I want to say is, that in Europe people look at
everything from the viewpoint of science.  But man is neither
mere physiology, nor biology, nor psychology, nor even sociology.
For God's sake don't forget that.  Man is infinitely more than
the natural science of himself.  You laugh at me, calling me the
schoolmaster's pupil, but that is what you are, not I.  You want
to find the truth of man from your science teachers, and not from
your own inner being."

"But why all this excitement?"  I mocked.

"Because I see you are bent on insulting man and making him
petty."

"Where on earth do you see all that?"

"In the air, in my outraged feelings.  You would go on wounding
the great, the unselfish, the beautiful in man."

"What mad idea is this of yours?"

Nikhil suddenly stood up.  "I tell you plainly, Sandip," he said,
"man may be wounded unto death, but he will not die.  This is the
reason why I am ready to suffer all, knowing all, with eyes
open."

With these words he hurriedly left the room.

I was staring blankly at his retreating figure, when the sound of
a book, falling from the table, made me turn to find Bee
following him with quick, nervous steps, making a detour to avoid
passing too near me.

A curious creature, that Nikhil!  He feels the danger threatening
his home, and yet why does he not turn me out?  I know, he is
waiting for Bimal to give him the cue.  If Bimal tells him that
their mating has been a misfit, he will bow his head and admit
that it may have been a blunder!  He has not the strength of mind
to understand that to acknowledge a mistake is the greatest of
all mistakes.  He is a typical example of how ideas make for
weakness.  I have not seen another like him--so whimsical a
product of nature!  He would hardly do as a character in a novel
or drama, to say nothing of real life.

And Bee?  I am afraid her dream-life is over from today.  She has
at length understood the nature of the current which is bearing
her along.  Now she must either advance or retreat, open-eyed.
The chances are she will now advance a step, and then retreat a
step.  But that does not disturb me.  When one is on fire, this
rushing to and fro makes the blaze all the fiercer.  The fright
she has got will only fan her passion.

Perhaps I had better not say much to her, but simply select some
modern books for her to read.  Let her gradually come to the
conviction that to acknowledge and respect passion as the supreme
reality, is to be modern--not to be ashamed of it, not to glorify
restraint.  If she finds shelter in some such word as "modern",
she will find strength.

Be that as it may, I must see this out to the end of the Fifth
Act.  I cannot, unfortunately, boast of being merely a spectator,
seated in the royal box, applauding now and again.  There is a
wrench at my heart, a pang in every nerve.  When I have put out
the light and am in my bed, little touches, little glances,
little words flit about and fill the darkness.  When I get up in
the morning, I thrill with lively anticipations, my blood seems
to course through me to the strains of music ...

There was a double photo-frame on the table with Bee's photograph
by the side of Nikhil's.  I had taken out hers.  Yesterday I
showed Bee the empty side and said: "Theft becomes necessary only
because of miserliness, so its sin must be divided between the
miser and the thief.  Do you not think so?"

"It was not a good one," observed Bee simply, with a little
smile.

"What is to be done?"  said I.  "A portrait cannot be better than
a portrait.  I must be content with it, such as it is."

Bee took up a book and began to turn over the pages.  "If you are
annoyed," I went on, "I must make a shift to fill up the
vacancy."

Today I have filled it up.  This photograph of mine was taken in
my early youth.  My face was then fresher, and so was my mind.
Then I still cherished some illusions about this world and the
next.  Faith deceives men, but it has one great merit: it imparts
a radiance to the features.

My portrait now reposes next to Nikhil's, for are not the two of
us old friends?



Chapter Four

Nikhil's Story

III


I WAS never self-conscious.  But nowadays I often try to take an
outside view--to see myself as Bimal sees me.  What a dismally
solemn picture it makes, my habit of taking things too seriously!

Better, surely, to laugh away the world than flood it with tears.
That is, in fact, how the world gets on.  We relish our food and
rest, only because we can dismiss, as so many empty shadows, the
sorrows scattered everywhere, both in the home and in the outer
world.  If we took them as true, even for a moment, where would
be our appetite, our sleep?

But I cannot dismiss myself as one of these shadows, and so the
load of my sorrow lies eternally heavy on the heart of my world.

Why not stand out aloof in the highway of the universe, and feel
yourself to be part of the all?  In the midst of the immense,
age-long concourse of humanity, what is Bimal to you?  Your wife?
What is a wife?  A bubble of a name blown big with your own
breath, so carefully guarded night and day, yet ready to burst at
any pin-prick from outside.

My wife--and so, forsooth, my very own!  If she says: "No, I am
myself"--am I to reply: "How can that be?  Are you not mine?"

"My wife"--Does that amount to an argument, much less the truth?
Can one imprison a whole personality within that name?

My wife!--Have I not cherished in this little world all that is
purest and sweetest in my life, never for a moment letting it
down from my bosom to the dust?  What incense of worship, what
music of passion, what flowers of my spring and of my autumn,
have I not offered up at its shrine?  If, like a toy paper-boat,
she be swept along into the muddy waters of the gutter--would I
not also...  ?

There it is again, my incorrigible solemnity!  Why "muddy"?  What
"gutter" names, called in a fit of jealousy, do not change the
facts of the world.  If Bimal is not mine, she is not; and no
fuming, or fretting, or arguing will serve to prove that she is.
If my heart is breaking--let it break!  That will not make the
world bankrupt--nor even me; for man is so much greater than the
things he loses in this life.  The very ocean of tears has its
other shore, else none would have ever wept.

But then there is Society to be considered ...  which let Society
consider!  If I weep it is for myself, not for Society.  If Bimal
should say she is not mine, what care I where my Society wife may
be?

Suffering there must be; but I must save myself, by any means in
my power, from one form of self-torture: I must never think that
my life loses its value because of any neglect it may suffer.
The full value of my life does not all go to buy my narrow
domestic world; its great commerce does not stand or fall with
some petty success or failure in the bartering of my personal
joys and sorrows.

The time has come when I must divest Bimala of all the ideal
decorations with which I decked her.  It was owing to my own
weakness that I indulged in such idolatry.  I was too greedy.  I
created an angel of Bimala, in order to exaggerate my own
enjoyment.  But Bimala is what she is.  It is preposterous to
expect that she should assume the rôle of an angel for my
pleasure.  The Creator is under no obligation to supply me with
angels, just because I have an avidity for imaginary perfection.

I must acknowledge that I have merely been an accident in
Bimala's life.  Her nature, perhaps, can only find true union
with one like Sandip.  At the same time, I must not, in false
modesty, accept my rejection as my desert.  Sandip certainly has
attractive qualities, which had their sway also upon myself; but
yet, I feel sure, he is not a greater man than I.  If the wreath
of victory falls to his lot today, and I am overlooked, then the
dispenser of the wreath will be called to judgement.

I say this in no spirit of boasting.  Sheer necessity has driven
me to the pass, that to secure myself from utter desolation I
must recognize all the value that I truly possess.  Therefore,
through the, terrible experience of suffering let there come upon
me the joy of deliverance--deliverance from self-distrust.

I have come to distinguish what is really in me from what I
foolishly imagined to be there.  The profit and loss account has
been settled, and that which remains is myself--not a crippled
self, dressed in rags and tatters, not a sick self to be nursed
on invalid diet, but a spirit which has gone through the worst,
and has survived.

My master passed through my room a moment ago and said with his
hand on my shoulder.  "Get away to bed, Nikhil, the night is far
advanced."

The fact is, it has become so difficult for me to go to bed till
late--till Bimal is fast asleep.  In the day-time we meet, and
even converse, but what am I to say when we are alone together,
in the silence of the night?--so ashamed do I feel in mind and
body.

"How is it, sir, you have not yet retired?"  I asked in my turn.
My master smiled a little, as he left me, saying: "My sleeping
days are over.  I have now attained the waking age."

I had written thus far, and was about to rise to go off bedwards
when, through the window before me, I saw the heavy pall of July
cloud suddenly part a little, and a big star shine through.  It
seemed to say to me: "Dreamland ties are made, and dreamland ties
are broken, but I am here for ever--the everlasting lamp of the
bridal night."

All at once my heart was full with the thought that my Eternal
Love was steadfastly waiting for me through the ages, behind the
veil of material things.  Through many a life, in many a mirror,
have I seen her image--broken mirrors, crooked mirrors, dusty
mirrors.  Whenever I have sought to make the mirror my very own,
and shut it up within my box, I have lost sight of the image.
But what of that.  What have I to do with the mirror, or even the
image?

My beloved, your smile shall never fade, and every dawn there
shall appear fresh for me the vermilion mark on your forehead!

"What childish cajolery of self-deception," mocks some devil from
his dark corner--"silly prattle to make children quiet!"

That may be.  But millions and millions of children, with their
million cries, have to be kept quiet.  Can it be that all this
multitude is quieted with only a lie?  No, my Eternal Love cannot
deceive me, for she is true!

She is true; that is why I have seen her and shall see her so
often, even in my mistakes, even through the thickest mist of
tears.  I have seen her and lost her in the crowd of life's
market-place, and found her again; and I shall find her once more
when I have escaped through the loophole of death.

Ah, cruel one, play with me no longer!  If I have failed to track
you by the marks of your footsteps on the way, by the scent of
your tresses lingering in the air, make me not weep for that for
ever.  The unveiled star tells me not to fear.  That which is
eternal must always be there.

Now let me go and see my Bimala.  She must have spread her tired
limbs on the bed, limp after her struggles, and be asleep.  I
will leave a kiss on her forehead without waking her--that shall
be the flower-offering of my worship.  I believe I could forget
everything after death--all my mistakes, all my sufferings--but
some vibration of the memory of that kiss would remain; for the
wreath which is being woven out of the kisses of many a
successive birth is to crown the Eternal Beloved.

As the gong of the watch rang out, sounding the hour of two, my
sister-in-law came into the room.  "Whatever are you doing,
brother dear?"  [16] she cried.  "For pity's sake go to bed and
stop worrying so.  I cannot bear to look on that awful shadow of
pain on your face."  Tears welled up in her eyes and overflowed
as she entreated me thus.

I could not utter a word, but took the dust of her feet, as I
went off to bed.

------

16. When a relationship is established by marriage, or by mutual
understanding arising out of special friendship or affection, the
persons so related call each other in terms of such relationship,
and not by name.  [Trans.].



Bimala's Story

VII



At first I suspected nothing, feared nothing; I simply felt
dedicated to my country.  What a stupendous joy there was in this
unquestioning surrender.  Verily had I realized how, in
thoroughness of self-destruction, man can find supreme bliss.

For aught I know, this frenzy of mine might have come to a
gradual, natural end.  But Sandip Babu would not have it so, he
would insist on revealing himself.  The tone of his voice became
as intimate as a touch, every look flung itself on its knees in
beggary.  And, through it all, there burned a passion which in
its violence made as though it would tear me up by the roots, and
drag me along by the hair.

I will not shirk the truth.  This cataclysmal desire drew me by
day and by night.  It seemed desperately alluring--this making
havoc of myself.  What a shame it seemed, how terrible, and yet
how sweet!  Then there was my overpowering curiosity, to which
there seemed no limit.  He of whom I knew but little, who never
could assuredly be mine, whose youth flared so vigorously in a
hundred points of flame--oh, the mystery of his seething
passions, so immense, so tumultuous!

I began with a feeling of worship, but that soon passed away.  I
ceased even to respect Sandip; on the contrary, I began to look
down upon him.  Nevertheless this flesh-and-blood lute of mine,
fashioned with my feeling and fancy, found in him a master-
player.  What though I shrank from his touch, and even came to
loathe the lute itself; its music was conjured up all the same.

I must confess there was something in me which ...  what shall I
say?  ...  which makes me wish I could have died!

Chandranath Babu, when he finds leisure, comes to me.  He has the
power to lift my mind up to an eminence from where I can see in a
moment the boundary of my life extended on all sides and so
realize that the lines, which I took from my bounds, were merely
imaginary.

But what is the use of it all?  Do I really desire emancipation?
Let suffering come to our house; let the best in me shrivel up
and become black; but let this infatuation not leave me--such
seems to be my prayer.

When, before my marriage, I used to see a brother-in-law of mine,
now dead, mad with drink--beating his wife in his frenzy, and
then sobbing and howling in maudlin repentance, vowing never to
touch liquor again, and yet, the very same evening, sitting down
to drink and drink--it would fill me with disgust.  But my
intoxication today is still more fearful.  The stuff has not to
be procured or poured out: it springs within my veins, and I know
not how to resist it.

Must this continue to the end of my days?  Now and again I start
and look upon myself, and think my life to be a nightmare which
will vanish all of a sudden with all its untruth.  It has become
so frightfully incongruous.  It has no connection with its past.
What it is, how it could have come to this pass, I cannot
understand.

One day my sister-in-law remarked with a cutting laugh: "What a
wonderfully hospitable Chota Rani we have!  Her guest absolutely
will not budge.  In our time there used to be guests, too; but
they had not such lavish looking after--we were so absurdly taken
up with our husbands.  Poor brother Nikhil is paying the penalty
of being born too modern.  He should have come as a guest if he
wanted to stay on.  Now it looks as if it were time for him to
quit ...  O you little demon, do your glances never fall, by
chance, on his agonized face?"

This sarcasm did not touch me; for I knew that these women had it
not in them to understand the nature of the cause of my devotion.
I was then wrapped in the protecting armour of the exaltation of
sacrifice, through which such shafts were powerless to reach and
shame me.

VIII



For some time all talk of the country's cause has been dropped.
Our conversation nowadays has become full of modern sex-problems,
and various other matters, with a sprinkling of poetry, both old
Vaishnava and modern English, accompanied by a running undertone
of melody, low down in the bass, such as I have never in my life
heard before, which seems to me to sound the true manly note, the
note of power.

The day had come when all cover was gone.  There was no longer
even the pretence of a reason why Sandip Babu should linger on,
or why I should have confidential talks with him every now and
then.  I felt thoroughly vexed with myself, with my sister-in-
law, with the ways of the world, and I vowed I would never again
go to the outer apartments, not if I were to die for it.

For two whole days I did not stir out.  Then, for the first time,
I discovered how far I had travelled.  My life felt utterly
tasteless.  Whatever I touched I wanted to thrust away.  I felt
myself waiting--from the crown of my head to the tips of my toes
--waiting for something, somebody; my blood kept tingling with
some expectation.

I tried busying myself with extra work.  The bedroom floor was
clean enough but I insisted on its being scrubbed over again
under my eyes.  Things were arranged in the cabinets in one kind
of order; I pulled them all out and rearranged them in a
different way.  I found no time that afternoon even to do up my
hair; I hurriedly tied it into a loose knot, and went and worried
everybody, fussing about the store-room.  The stores seemed
short, and pilfering must have been going on of late, but I could
not muster up the courage to take any particular person to task--
for might not the thought have crossed somebody's mind: "Where
were your eyes all these days!"

In short, I behaved that day as one possessed.  The next day I
tried to do some reading.  What I read I have no idea, but after
a spell of absentmindedness I found I had wandered away, book in
hand, along the passage leading towards the outer apartments, and
was standing by a window looking out upon the verandah running
along the row of rooms on the opposite side of the quadrangle.
One of these rooms, I felt, had crossed over to another shore,
and the ferry had ceased to ply.  I felt like the ghost of myself
of two days ago, doomed to remain where I was, and yet not really
there, blankly looking out for ever.

As I stood there, I saw Sandip come out of his room into the
verandah, a newspaper in his hand.  I could see that he looked
extraordinarily disturbed.  The courtyard, the railings, in
front, seemed to rouse his wrath.  He flung away his newspaper
with a gesture which seemed to want to rend the space before him.

I felt I could no longer keep my vow.  I was about to move on
towards the sitting-room, when I found my sister-in-law behind
me.  "O Lord, this beats everything!"  she ejaculated, as she
glided away.  I could not proceed to the outer apartments.

The next morning when my maid came calling, "Rani Mother, it is
getting late for giving out the stores," I flung the keys to her,
saying, "Tell Harimati to see to it," and went on with some
embroidery of English pattern on which I was engaged, seated near
the window.

Then came a servant with a letter.  "From Sandip Babu," said he.
What unbounded boldness!  What must the messenger have thought?
There was a tremor within my breast as I opened the envelope.
There was no address on the letter, only the words: __An urgent
matter--touching the Cause.  Sandip__.

I flung aside the embroidery.  I was up on my feet in a moment,
giving a touch or two to my hair by the mirror.  I kept the
__sari__ I had on, changing only my jacket--for one of my
jackets had its associations.

I had to pass through one of the verandahs, where my sister-in-
law used to sit in the morning slicing betel-nut.  I refused to
feel awkward.  "Whither away, Chota Rani?"  she cried.

"To the sitting-room outside."

"So early!  A matinée, eh?"

And, as I passed on without further reply, she hummed after me a
flippant song.

IX



When I was about to enter the sitting-room, I saw Sandip immersed
in an illustrated catalogue of British Academy pictures, with his
back to the door.  He has a great notion of himself as an expert
in matters of Art.

One day my husband said to him: "If the artists ever want a
teacher, they need never lack for one so long as you are there."
It had not been my husband's habit to speak cuttingly, but
latterly there has been a change and he never spares Sandip.

"What makes you suppose that artists need no teachers?"  Sandip
retorted.

"Art is a creation," my husband replied.  "So we should humbly be
content to receive our lessons about Art from the work of the
artist."

Sandip laughed at this modesty, saying: "You think that meekness
is a kind of capital which increases your wealth the more you use
it.  It is my conviction that those who lack pride only float
about like water reeds which have no roots in the soil."

My mind used to be full of contradictions when they talked thus.
On the one hand I was eager that my husband should win in
argument and that Sandip's pride should be shamed.  Yet, on the
other, it was Sandip's unabashed pride which attracted me so.  It
shone like a precious diamond, which knows no diffidence, and
sparkles in the face of the sun itself.

I entered the room.  I knew Sandip could hear my footsteps as I
went forward, but he pretended not to, and kept his eyes on the
book.

I dreaded his Art talks, for I could not overcome my delicacy
about the pictures he talked of, and the things he said, and had
much ado in putting on an air of overdone insensibility to hide
my qualms.  So, I was almost on the point of retracing my steps,
when, with a deep sigh, Sandip raised his eyes, and affected to
be startled at the sight of me.  "Ah, you have come!"  he said.

In his words, in his tone, in his eyes, there was a world of
suppressed reproach, as if the claims he had acquired over me
made my absence, even for these two or three days, a grievous
wrong.  I knew this attitude was an insult to me, but, alas, I
had not the power to resent it.

I made no reply, but though I was looking another way, I could
not help feeling that Sandip's plaintive gaze had planted itself
right on my face, and would take no denial.  I did so wish he
would say something, so that I could shelter myself behind his
words.  I cannot tell how long this went on, but at last I could
stand it no longer.  "What is this matter," I asked, "you are
wanting to tell me about?"

Sandip again affected surprise as he said: "Must there always be
some matter?  Is friendship by itself a crime?  Oh, Queen Bee, to
think that you should make so light of the greatest thing on
earth!  Is the heart's worship to be shut out like a stray cur?"

There was again that tremor within me.  I could feel the crisis
coming, too importunate to be put off.  Joy and fear struggled
for the mastery.  Would my shoulders, I wondered, be broad enough
to stand its shock, or would it not leave me overthrown, with my
face in the dust?

I was trembling all over.  Steadying myself with an effort I
repeated: "You summoned me for something touching the Cause, so I
have left my household duties to attend to it."

"That is just what I was trying to explain," he said, with a dry
laugh.  "Do you not know that I come to worship?  Have I not told
you that, in you, I visualize the __Shakti__ of our country?
The Geography of a country is not the whole truth.  No one can
give up his life for a map!  When I see you before me, then only
do I realize how lovely my country is.  When you have anointed me
with your own hands, then shall I know I have the sanction of my
country; and if, with that in my heart, I fall fighting, it shall
not be on the dust of some map-made land, but on a lovingly
spread skirt--do you know what kind of skirt?--like that of the
earthen-red __sari__ you wore the other day, with a broad
blood-red border.  Can I ever forget it?  Such are the visions
which give vigour to life, and joy to death!"

Sandip's eyes took fire as he went on, but whether it was the
fire of worship, or of passion, I could not tell.  I was reminded
of the day on which I first heard him speak, when I could not be
sure whether he was a person, or just a living flame.

I had not the power to utter a word.  You cannot take shelter
behind the walls of decorum when in a moment the fire leaps up
and, with the flash of its sword and the roar of its laughter,
destroys all the miser's stores.  I was in terror lest he should
forget himself and take me by the hand.  For he shook like a
quivering tongue of fire; his eyes showered scorching sparks on
me.

"Are you for ever determined," he cried after a pause, "to make
gods of your petty household duties--you who have it in you to
send us to life or to death?  Is this power of yours to be kept
veiled in a zenana?  Cast away all false shame, I pray you; snap
your fingers at the whispering around.  Take your plunge today
into the freedom of the outer world."

When, in Sandip's appeals, his worship of the country gets to be
subtly interwoven with his worship of me, then does my blood
dance, indeed, and the barriers of my hesitation totter.  His
talks about Art and Sex, his distinctions between Real and
Unreal, had but clogged my attempts at response with some
revolting nastiness.  This, however, now burst again into a glow
before which my repugnance faded away.  I felt that my
resplendent womanhood made me indeed a goddess.  Why should not
its glory flash from my forehead with visible brilliance?  Why
does not my voice find a word, some audible cry, which would be
like a sacred spell to my country for its fire initiation?

All of a sudden my maid Khema rushed into the room, dishevelled.
"Give me my wages and let me go," she screamed.  "Never in all my
life have I been so ..."  The rest of her speech was drowned in
sobs.

"What is the matter?"

Thako, the Bara Rani's maid, it appeared, had for no rhyme or
reason reviled her in unmeasured terms.  She was in such a state,
it was no manner of use trying to pacify her by saying I would
look into the matter afterwards.

The slime of domestic life that lay beneath the lotus bank of
womanhood came to the surface.  Rather than allow Sandip a
prolonged vision of it, I had to hurry back within.



X


My sister-in-law was absorbed in her betel-nuts, the suspicion of
a smile playing about her lips, as if nothing untoward had
happened.  She was still humming the same song.

"Why has your Thako been calling poor Khema names?"  I burst out.

"Indeed?  The wretch!  I will have her broomed out of the house.
What a shame to spoil your morning out like this!  As for Khema,
where are the hussy's manners to go and disturb you when you are
engaged?  Anyhow, Chota Rani, don't you worry yourself with these
domestic squabbles.  Leave them to me, and return to your
friend."

How suddenly the wind in the sails of our mind veers round!  This
going to meet Sandip outside seemed, in the light of the zenana
code, such an extraordinarily out-of-the-way thing to do that I
went off to my own room, at a loss for a reply.  I knew this was
my sister-in-law's doing and that she had egged her maid on to
contrive this scene.  But I had brought myself to such an
unstable poise that I dared not have my fling.

Why, it was only the other day that I found I could not keep up
to the last the unbending hauteur with which I had demanded from
my husband the dismissal of the man Nanku.  I felt suddenly
abashed when the Bara Rani came up and said: "It is really all my
fault, brother dear.  We are old-fashioned folk, and I did not
quite like the ways of your Sandip Babu, so I only told the guard
...  but how was I to know that our Chota Rani would take this as
an insult?--I thought it would be the other way about!  Just my
incorrigible silliness!"

The thing which seems so glorious when viewed from the heights of
the country's cause, looks so muddy when seen from the bottom.
One begins by getting angry, and then feels disgusted.

I shut myself into my room, sitting by the window, thinking how
easy life would be if only one could keep in harmony with one's
surroundings.  How simply the senior Rani sits in her verandah
with her betel-nuts and how inaccessible to me has become my
natural seat beside my daily duties!  Where will it all end, I
asked myself?  Shall I ever recover, as from a delirium, and
forget it all; or am I to be dragged to depths from which there
can be no escape in this life?  How on earth did I manage to let
my good fortune escape me, and spoil my life so?  Every wall of
this bedroom of mine, which I first entered nine years ago as a
bride, stares at me in dismay.

When my husband came home, after his M.A.  examination, he
brought for me this orchid belonging to some far-away land beyond
the seas.  From beneath these few little leaves sprang such a
cascade of blossoms, it looked as if they were pouring forth from
some overturned urn of Beauty.  We decided, together, to hang it
here, over this window.  It flowered only that once, but we have
always been in hope of its doing so once more.  Curiously enough
I have kept on watering it these days, from force of habit, and
it is still green.

It is now four years since I framed a photograph of my husband in
ivory and put it in the niche over there.  If I happen to look
that way I have to lower my eyes.  Up to last week I used
regularly to put there the flowers of my worship, every morning
after my bath.  My husband has often chided me over this.

"It shames me to see you place me on a height to which I do not
belong," he said one day.

"What nonsense!"

"I am not only ashamed, but also jealous!"

"Just hear him!  Jealous of whom, pray?"

"Of that false me.  It only shows that I am too petty for you,
that you want some extraordinary man who can overpower you with
his superiority, and so you needs must take refuge in making for
yourself another 'me'."

"This kind of talk only makes me angry," said I.

"What is the use of being angry with me?"  he replied.  "Blame
your fate which allowed you no choice, but made you take me
blindfold.  This keeps you trying to retrieve its blunder by
making me out a paragon."

I felt so hurt at the bare idea that tears started to my eyes
that day.  And whenever I think of that now, I cannot raise my
eyes to the niche.

For now there is another photograph in my jewel case.  The other
day, when arranging the sitting-room, I brought away that double
photo frame, the one in which Sandip's portrait was next to my
husband's.  To this portrait I have no flowers of worship to
offer, but it remains hidden away under my gems.  It has all the
greater fascination because kept secret.  I look at it now and
then with doors closed.  At night I turn up the lamp, and sit
with it in my hand, gazing and gazing.  And every night I think
of burning it in the flame of the lamp, to be done with it for
ever; but every night I heave a sigh and smother it again in my
pearls and diamonds.

Ah, wretched woman!  What a wealth of love was twined round each
one of those jewels!  Oh, why am I not dead?

Sandip had impressed it on me that hesitation is not in the
nature of woman.  For her, neither right nor left has any
existence--she only moves forward.  When the women of our country
wake up, he repeatedly insisted, their voice will be unmistakably
confident in its utterance of the cry: "I want."

"I want!"  Sandip went on one day--this was the primal word at
the root of all creation.  It had no maxim to guide it, but it
became fire and wrought itself into suns and stars.  Its
partiality is terrible.  Because it had a desire for man, it
ruthlessly sacrificed millions of beasts for millions of years to
achieve that desire.  That terrible word "I want" has taken flesh
in woman, and therefore men, who are cowards, try with all their
might to keep back this primeval flood With their earthen dykes.
They are afraid lest, laughing and dancing as it goes, it should
wash away all the hedges and props of their pumpkin field.  Men,
in every age, flatter themselves that they have secured this
force within the bounds of their convenience, but it gathers and
grows.  Now it is calm and deep like a lake, but gradually its
pressure will increase, the dykes will give way, and the force
which has so long been dumb will rush forward with the roar: "I
want!"

These words of Sandip echo in my heart-beats like a war-drum.
They shame into silence all my conflicts with myself.  What do I
care what people may think of me?  Of what value are that orchid
and that niche in my bedroom?  What power have they to belittle
me, to put me to shame?  The primal fire of creation burns in me.

I felt a strong desire to snatch down the orchid and fling it out
of the window, to denude the niche of its picture, to lay bare
and naked the unashamed spirit of destruction that raged within
me.  My arm was raised to do it, but a sudden pang passed through
my breast, tears started to my eyes.  I threw myself down and
sobbed: "What is the end of all this, what is the end?"



Sandip's Story

IV



When I read these pages of the story of my life I seriously
question myself: Is this Sandip?  Am I made of words?  Am I
merely a book with a covering of flesh and blood?

The earth is not a dead thing like the moon.  She breathes.  Her
rivers and oceans send up vapours in which she is clothed.  She
is covered with a mantle of her own dust which flies about the
air.  The onlooker, gazing upon the earth from the outside, can
see only the light reflected from this vapour and this dust.  The
tracks of the mighty continents are not distinctly visible.

The man, who is alive as this earth is, is likewise always
enveloped in the mist of the ideas which he is breathing out.
His real land and water remain hidden, and he appears to be made
of only lights and shadows.

It seems to me, in this story of my life, that, like a living
plant, I am displaying the picture of an ideal world.  But I am
not merely what I want, what I think--I am also what I do not
love, what I do not wish to be.  My creation had begun before I
was born.  I had no choice in regard to my surroundings and so
must make the best of such material as comes to my hand.

My theory of life makes me certain that the Great is cruel To be
just is for ordinary men--it is reserved for the great to be
unjust.  The surface of the earth was even.  The volcano butted
it with its fiery horn and found its own eminence--its justice
was not towards its obstacle, but towards itself.  Successful
injustice and genuine cruelty have been the only forces by which
individual or nation has become millionaire or monarch.

That is why I preach the great discipline of Injustice.  I say to
everyone: Deliverance is based upon injustice.  Injustice is the
fire which must keep on burning something in order to save itself
from becoming ashes.  Whenever an individual or nation becomes
incapable of perpetrating injustice it is swept into the dust-bin
of the world.

As yet this is only my idea--it is not completely myself.  There
are rifts in the armour through which something peeps out which
is extremely soft and sensitive.  Because, as I say, the best
part of myself was created before I came to this stage of
existence.

From time to time I try my followers in their lesson of cruelty.
One day we went on a picnic.  A goat was grazing by.  I asked
them: "Who is there among you that can cut off a leg of that
goat, alive, with this knife, and bring it to me?"  While they
all hesitated, I went myself and did it.  One of them fainted at
the sight.  But when they saw me unmoved they took the dust of my
feet, saying that I was above all human weaknesses.  That is to
say, they saw that day the vaporous envelope which was my idea,
but failed to perceive the inner me, which by a curious freak of
fate has been created tender and merciful.

In the present chapter of my life, which is growing in interest
every day round Bimala and Nikhil, there is also much that
remains hidden underneath.  This malady of ideas which afflicts
me is shaping my life within: nevertheless a great part of my
life remains outside its influence; and so there is set up a
discrepancy between my outward life and its inner design which I
try my best to keep concealed even from myself; otherwise it may
wreck not only my plans, but my very life.

Life is indefinite--a bundle of contradictions.  We men, with our
ideas, strive to give it a particular shape by melting it into a
particular mould--into the definiteness of success.  All the
world-conquerors, from Alexander down to the American
millionaires, mould themselves into a sword or a mint, and thus
find that distinct image of themselves which is the source of
their success.

The chief controversy between Nikhil and myself arises from this:
that though I say "know thyself", and Nikhil also says "know
thyself", his interpretation makes this "knowing" tantamount to
"not knowing".

"Winning your kind of success," Nikhil once objected, "is success
gained at the cost of the soul: but the soul is greater than
success."

I simply said in answer: "Your words are too vague."

"That I cannot help," Nikhil replied.  "A machine is distinct
enough, but not so life.  If to gain distinctness you try to know
life as a machine, then such mere distinctness cannot stand for
truth.  The soul is not as distinct as success, and so you only
lose your soul if you seek it in your success."

"Where, then, is this wonderful soul?"

"Where it knows itself in the infinite and transcends its
success."

"But how does all this apply to our work for the country?"

"It is the same thing.  Where our country makes itself the final
object, it gains success at the cost of the soul.  Where it
recognizes the Greatest as greater than all, there it may miss
success, but gains its soul."

"Is there any example of this in history?"

"Man is so great that he can despise not only the success, but
also the example.  Possibly example is lacking, just as there is
no example of the flower in the seed.  But there is the urgence
of the flower in the seed all the same."

It is not that I do not at all understand Nikhil's point of view;
that is rather where my danger lies.  I was born in India and the
poison of its spirituality runs in my blood.  However loudly I
may proclaim the madness of walking in the path of self-
abnegation, I cannot avoid it altogether.

This is exactly how such curious anomalies happen nowadays in our
country.  We must have our religion and also our nationalism; our
__Bhagavadgita__ and also our __Bande Mataram__.  The result is that
both of them suffer.  It is like performing with an English military
band, side by side with our Indian festive pipes.  I must make it
the purpose of my life to put an end to this hideous confusion.

I want the western military style to prevail, not the Indian.
We shall then not be ashamed of the flag of our passion, which
mother Nature has sent with us as our standard into the
battlefield of life.  Passion is beautiful and pure--pure as the
lily that comes out of the slimy soil.  It rises superior to its
defilement and needs no Pears' soap to wash it clean.



V


A question has been worrying me the last few days.  Why am I
allowing my life to become entangled with Bimala's?  Am I a
drifting log to be caught up at any and every obstacle?

Not that I have any false shame at Bimala becoming an object of
my desire.  It is only too clear how she wants me, and so I look
on her as quite legitimately mine.  The fruit hangs on the branch
by the stem, but that is no reason why the claim of the stem
should be eternal.  Ripe fruit cannot for ever swear by its
slackening stem-hold.  All its sweetness has been accumulated for
me; to surrender itself to my hand is the reason of its
existence, its very nature, its true morality.  So I must pluck
it, for it becomes me not to make it futile.

But what is teasing me is that I am getting entangled.  Am I not
born to rule?--to bestride my proper steed, the crowd, and drive
it as I will; the reins in my hand, the destination known only to
me, and for it the thorns, the mire, on the road?  This steed now
awaits me at the door, pawing and champing its bit, its neighing
filling the skies.  But where am I, and what am I about, letting
day after day of golden opportunity slip by?

I used to think I was like a storm--that the torn flowers with
which I strewed my path would not impede my progress.  But I am
only wandering round and round a flower like a bee--not a storm.
So, as I was saying, the colouring of ideas which man gives
himself is only superficial.  The inner man remains as ordinary
as ever.  If someone, who could see right into me, were to write
my biography, he would make me out to be no different from that
lout of a Panchu, or even from Nikhil!

Last night I was turning over the pages of my old diary ...  I
had just graduated, and my brain was bursting with philosophy.
Even so early I had vowed not to harbour any illusions, whether
of my own or other's imagining, but to build my life on a solid
basis of reality.  But what has since been its actual story?
Where is its solidity?  It has rather been a network, where,
though the thread be continuous, more space is taken up by the
holes.  Fight as I may, these will not own defeat.  Just as I was
congratulating myself on steadily following the thread, here I am
badly caught in a hole!  For I have become susceptible to
compunctions.

"I want it; it is here; let me take it"--This is a clear-cut,
straightforward policy.  Those who can pursue its course with
vigour needs must win through in the end.  But the gods would not
have it that such journey should be easy, so they have deputed
the siren Sympathy to distract the wayfarer, to dim his vision
with her tearful mist.

I can see that poor Bimala is struggling like a snared deer.
What a piteous alarm there is in her eyes!  How she is torn with
straining at her bonds!  This sight, of course, should gladden
the heart of a true hunter.  And so do I rejoice; but, then, I am
also touched; and therefore I dally, and standing on the brink I
am hesitating to pull the noose fast.

There have been moments, I know, when I could have bounded up to
her, clasped her hands and folded her to my breast, unresisting.
Had I done so, she would not have said one word.  She was aware
that some crisis was impending, which in a moment would change
the meaning of the whole world.  Standing before that cavern of
the incalculable but yet expected, her face went pale and her
eyes glowed with a fearful ecstasy.  Within that moment, when it
arrives, an eternity will take shape, which our destiny awaits,
holding its breath.

But I have let this moment slip by.  I did not, with
uncompromising strength, press the almost certain into the
absolutely assured.  I now see clearly that some hidden elements
in my nature have openly ranged themselves as obstacles in my
path.

That is exactly how Ravana, whom I look upon as the real hero of
the __Ramayana__, met with his doom.  He kept Sita in his
Asoka garden, awaiting her pleasure, instead of taking her
straight into his harem.  This weak spot in his otherwise grand
character made the whole of the abduction episode futile.
Another such touch of compunction made him disregard, and be
lenient to, his traitorous brother Bibhisan, only to get himself
killed for his pains.

Thus does the tragic in life come by its own.  In the beginning
it lies, a little thing, in some dark under-vault, and ends by
overthrowing the whole superstructure.  The real tragedy is, that
man does not know himself for what he really is.

VI



Then again there is Nikhil.  Crank though he be, laugh at him as
I may, I cannot get rid of the idea that he is my friend.  At
first I gave no thought to his point of view, but of late it has
begun to shame and hurt me.  Therefore I have been trying to talk
and argue with him in the same enthusiastic way as of old, but it
does not ring true.  It is even leading me at times into such a
length of unnaturalness as to pretend to agree with him.  But
such hypocrisy is not in my nature, nor in that of Nikhil either.
This, at least, is something we have in common.  That is why,
nowadays, I would rather not come across him, and have taken to
fighting shy of his presence.

All these are signs of weakness.  No sooner is the possibility of
a wrong admitted than it becomes actual, and clutches you by the
throat, however you may then try to shake off all belief in it.
What I should like to be able to tell Nikhil frankly is, that
happenings such as these must be looked in the face--as great
Realities--and that which is the Truth should not be allowed to
stand between true friends.

There is no denying that I have really weakened.  It was not this
weakness which won over Bimala; she burnt her wings in the blaze
of the full strength of my unhesitating manliness.  Whenever
smoke obscures its lustre she also becomes confused, and draws
back.  Then comes a thorough revulsion of feeling, and she fain
would take back the garland she has put round my neck, but
cannot; and so she only closes her eyes, to shut it out of sight.

But all the same I must not swerve from the path I have chalked
out.  It would never do to abandon the cause of the country,
especially at the present time.  I shall simply make Bimala one
with my country.  The turbulent west wind which has swept away
the country's veil of conscience, will sweep away the veil of the
wife from Bimala's face, and in that uncovering there will be no
shame.  The ship will rock as it bears the crowd across the
ocean, flying the pennant of __Bande Mataram__, and it will
serve as the cradle to my power, as well as to my love.

Bimala will see such a majestic vision of deliverance, that her
bonds will slip from about her, without shame, without her even
being aware of it.  Fascinated by the beauty of this terrible
wrecking power, she will not hesitate a moment to be cruel.  I
have seen in Bimala's nature the cruelty which is the inherent
force of existence--the cruelty which with its unrelenting might
keeps the world beautiful.

If only women could be set free from the artificial fetters put
round them by men, we could see on earth the living image of
Kali, the shameless, pitiless goddess.  I am a worshipper of
Kali, and one day I shall truly worship her, setting Bimala on
her altar of Destruction.  For this let me get ready.

The way of retreat is absolutely closed for both of us.  We shall
despoil each other: get to hate each other: but never more be
free.



Chapter Five

Nikhil's Story

IV



EVERYTHING is rippling and waving with the flood of August.  The
young shoots of rice have the sheen of an infant's limbs.  The
water has invaded the garden next to our house.  The morning
light, like the love of the blue sky, is lavished upon the earth
...  Why cannot I sing?  The water of the distant river is
shimmering with light; the leaves are glistening; the rice-
fields, with their fitful shivers, break into gleams of gold; and
in this symphony of Autumn, only I remain voiceless.  The
sunshine of the world strikes my heart, but is not reflected
back.

When I realize the lack of expressiveness in myself, I know why I
am deprived.  Who could bear my company day and night without a
break?  Bimala is full of the energy of life, and so she has
never become stale to me for a moment, in all these nine years of
our wedded life.

My life has only its dumb depths; but no murmuring rush.  I can
only receive: not impart movement.  And therefore my company is
like fasting.  I recognize clearly today that Bimala has been
languishing because of a famine of companionship.

Then whom shall I blame?  Like Vidyapati I can only lament:

/*
  It is August, the sky breaks into a passionate rain;
  Alas, empty is my house.
*/

My house, I now see, was built to remain empty, because its doors
cannot open.  But I never knew till now that its divinity had
been sitting outside.  I had fondly believed that she had
accepted my sacrifice, and granted in return her boon.  But,
alas, my house has all along been empty.

Every year, about this time, it was our practice to go in a
house-boat over the broads of Samalda.  I used to tell Bimala
that a song must come back to its refrain over and over again.
The original refrain of every song is in Nature, where the rain-
laden wind passes over the rippling stream, where the green
earth, drawing its shadow-veil over its face, keeps its ear close
to the speaking water.  There, at the beginning of time, a man
and a woman first met--not within walls.  And therefore we two
must come back to Nature, at least once a year, to tune our love
anew to the first pure note of the meeting of hearts.

The first two anniversaries of our married life I spent in
Calcutta, where I went through my examinations.  But from the
next year onwards, for seven years without a break, we have
celebrated our union among the blossoming water-lilies.  Now
begins the next octave of my life.

It was difficult for me to ignore the fact that the same month of
August had come round again this year.  Does Bimala remember it,
I wonder?--she has given me no reminder.  Everything is mute
about me.

/*
  It is August, the sky breaks into a passionate rain;
  Alas, empty is my house.
*/

The house which becomes empty through the parting of lovers,
still has music left in the heart of its emptiness.  But the
house that is empty because hearts are asunder, is awful in its
silence.  Even the cry of pain is out of place there.

This cry of pain must be silenced in me.  So long as I continue
to suffer, Bimala will never have true freedom.  I must free her
completely, otherwise I shall never gain my freedom from untruth
...

I think I have come to the verge of understanding one thing.  Man
has so fanned the flame of the loves of men and women, as to make
it overpass its rightful domain, and now, even in the name of
humanity itself, he cannot bring it back under control.  Man's
worship has idolized his passion.  But there must be no more
human sacrifices at its shrine ...

I went into my bedroom this morning, to fetch a book.  It is long
since I have been there in the day-time.  A pang passed through
me as I looked round it today, in the morning light.  On the
clothes rack was hanging a __sari__ of Bimala's, crinkled
ready for wear.  On the dressing-table were her perfumes, her
comb, her hair-pins, and with them, still, her vermilion box!
Underneath were her tiny gold-embroidered slippers.

Once, in the old days, when Bimala had not yet overcome her
objections to shoes, I had got these out from Lucknow, to tempt
her.  The first time she was ready to drop for very shame, to go
in them even from the room to the verandah.  Since then she has
worn out many shoes, but has treasured up this pair.  When first
showing her the slippers, I chaffed her over a curious practice
of hers; "I have caught you taking the dust of my feet, thinking
me asleep!  These are the offerings of my worship to ward the
dust off the feet of my wakeful divinity."  "You must not say
such things," she protested, "or I will never wear your shoes!"

This bedroom of mine--it has a subtle atmosphere which goes
straight to my heart.  I was never aware, as I am today, how my
thirsting heart has been sending out its roots to cling round
each and every familiar object.  The severing of the main root, I
see, is not enough to set life free.  Even these little slippers
serve to hold one back.

My wandering eyes fall on the niche.  My portrait there is
looking the same as ever, in spite of the flowers scattered round
it having been withered black!  Of all the things in the room
their greeting strikes me as sincere.  They are still here simply
because it was not felt worth while even to remove them.  Never
mind; let me welcome truth, albeit in such sere and sorry garb,
and look forward to the time when I shall be able to do so
unmoved, as does my photograph.

As I stood there, Bimal came in from behind.  I hastily turned my
eyes from the niche to the shelves as I muttered: "I came to get
Amiel's Journal."  What need had Ito volunteer an explanation?  I
felt like a wrong-doer, a trespasser, prying into a secret not
meant for me.  I could not look Bimal in the face, but hurried
away.

V



I had just made the discovery that it was useless to keep up a
pretence of reading in my room outside, and also that it was
equally beyond me to busy myself attending to anything at all--so
that all the days of my future bid fair to congeal into one solid
mass and settle heavily on my breast for good--when Panchu, the
tenant of a neighbouring __zamindar__, came up to me with a
basketful of cocoa-nuts and greeted me with a profound obeisance.

"Well, Panchu," said I.  "What is all this for?"

I had got to know Panchu through my master.  He was extremely
poor, nor was I in a position to do anything for him; so I
supposed this present was intended to procure a tip to help the
poor fellow to make both ends meet.  I took some money from my
purse and held it out towards him, but with folded hands he
protested: "I cannot take that, sir!"

"Why, what is the matter?"

"Let me make a clean breast of it, sir.  Once, when I was hard
pressed, I stole some cocoa-nuts from the garden here.  I am
getting old, and may die any day, so I have come to pay them
back."

Amiel's Journal could not have done me any good that day.  But
these words of Panchu lightened my heart.  There are more things
in life than the union or separation of man and woman.  The great
world stretches far beyond, and one can truly measure one's joys
and sorrows when standing in its midst.

Panchu was devoted to my master.  I know well enough how he
manages to eke out a livelihood.  He is up before dawn every day,
and with a basket of __pan__ leaves, twists of tobacco,
coloured cotton yarn, little combs, looking-glasses, and other
trinkets beloved of the village women, he wades through the knee-
deep water of the marsh and goes over to the Namasudra quarters.
There he barters his goods for rice, which fetches him a little
more than their price in money.  If he can get back soon enough
he goes out again, after a hurried meal, to the sweetmeat
seller's, where he assists in beating sugar for wafers.  As soon
as he comes home he sits at his shell-bangle making, plodding on
often till midnight.  All this cruel toil does not earn, for
himself and his family, a bare two meals a day during much more
than half the year.  His method of eating is to begin with a good
filling draught of water, and his staple food is the cheapest
kind of seedy banana.  And yet the family has to go with only one
meal a day for the rest of the year.

At one time I had an idea of making him a charity allowance,
"But," said my master, "your gift may destroy the man, it cannot
destroy the hardship of his lot.  Mother Bengal has not only this
one Panchu.  If the milk in her breasts has run dry, that cannot
be supplied from the outside."

These are thoughts which give one pause, and I decided to devote
myself to working it out.  That very day I said to Bimal: "Let us
dedicate our lives to removing the root of this sorrow in our
country."

"You are my Prince Siddharta, [17] I see," she replied with a
smile.  "But do not let the torrent of your feelings end by
sweeping me away also!"

"Siddharta took his vows alone.  I want ours to be a joint
arrangement."

The idea passed away in talk.  The fact is, Bimala is at heart
what is called a "lady".  Though her own people are not well off,
she was born a Rani.  She has no doubts in her mind that there is
a lower unit of measure for the trials and troubles of the "lower
classes".  Want is, of course, a permanent feature of their
lives, but does not necessarily mean "want" to them.  Their very
smallness protects them, as the banks protect the pool; by
widening bounds only the slime is exposed.

The real fact is that Bimala has only come into my home, not into
my life.  I had magnified her so, leaving her such a large place,
that when I lost her, my whole way of life became narrow and
confined.  I had thrust aside all other objects into a corner to
make room for Bimala--taken up as I was with decorating her and
dressing her and educating her and moving round her day and
night; forgetting how great is humanity and how nobly precious is
man's life.  When the actualities of everyday things get the
better of the man, then is Truth lost sight of and freedom
missed.  So painfully important did Bimala make the mere
actualities, that the truth remained concealed from me.  That is
why I find no gap in my misery, and spread this minute point of
my emptiness over all the world.  And so, for hours on this
Autumn morning, the refrain has been humming in my ears:

/*
  It is the month of August, and the sky breaks into a passionate
    rain;
  Alas, my house is empty.
*/

------

17. The name by which Buddha was known when a Prince, before
renouncing the world.



Bimala's Story

XI



The change which had, in a moment, come over the mind of Bengal
was tremendous.  It was as if the Ganges had touched the ashes of
the sixty thousand sons of Sagar [18] which no fire could
enkindle, no other water knead again into living clay.  The ashes
of lifeless Bengal suddenly spoke up: "Here am I."

I have read somewhere that in ancient Greece a sculptor had the
good fortune to impart life to the image made by his own hand.
Even in that miracle, however, there was the process of form
preceding life.  But where was the unity in this heap of barren
ashes?  Had they been hard like stone, we might have had hopes of
some form emerging, even as Ahalya, though turned to stone, at
last won back her humanity.  But these scattered ashes must have
dropped to the dust through gaps in the Creator's fingers, to be
blown hither and thither by the wind.  They had become heaped up,
but were never before united.  Yet in this day which had come to
Bengal, even this collection of looseness had taken shape, and
proclaimed in a thundering voice, at our very door: "Here I am."

How could we help thinking that it was all supernatural?  This
moment of our history seemed to have dropped into our hand like a
jewel from the crown of some drunken god.  It had no resemblance
to our past; and so we were led to hope that all our wants and
miseries would disappear by the spell of some magic charm, that
for us there was no longer any boundary line between the possible
and the impossible.  Everything seemed to be saying to us: "It is
coming; it has come!"

Thus we came to cherish the belief that our history needed no
steed, but that like heaven's chariot it would move with its own
inherent power--At least no wages would have to be paid to the
charioteer; only his wine cup would have to be filled again and
again.  And then in some impossible paradise the goal of our
hopes would be reached.

My husband was not altogether unmoved, but through all our
excitement it was the strain of sadness in him which deepened and
deepened.  He seemed to have a vision of something beyond the
surging present.

I remember one day, in the course of the arguments he continually
had with Sandip, he said: "Good fortune comes to our gate and
announces itself, only to prove that we have not the power to
receive it--that we have not kept things ready to be able to
invite it into our house."

"No," was Sandip's answer.  "You talk like an atheist because you
do not believe in our gods.  To us it has been made quite visible
that the Goddess has come with her boon, yet you distrust the
obvious signs of her presence."

"It is because I strongly believe in my God," said my husband,
"that I feel so certain that our preparations for his worship are
lacking.  God has power to give the boon, but we must have power
to accept it."

This kind of talk from my husband would only annoy me.  I could
not keep from joining in: "You think this excitement is only a
fire of drunkenness, but does not drunkenness, up to a point,
give strength?"

"Yes," my husband replied.  "It may give strength, but not
weapons."

"But strength is the gift of God," I went on.  "Weapons can be
supplied by mere mechanics."

My husband smiled.  "The mechanics will claim their wages before
they deliver their supplies," he said.

Sandip swelled his chest as he retorted: "Don't you trouble about
that.  Their wages shall be paid."

"I shall bespeak the festive music when the payment has been
made, not before," my husband answered.

"You needn't imagine that we are depending on your bounty for the
music," said Sandip scornfully.  "Our festival is above all money
payments."

And in his thick voice he began to sing:

/*
  "My lover of the unpriced love, spurning payments,
  Plays upon the simple pipe, bought for nothing,
  Drawing my heart away."
*/

Then with a smile he turned to me and said: "If I sing, Queen
Bee, it is only to prove that when music comes into one's life,
the lack of a good voice is no matter.  When we sing merely on
the strength of our tunefulness, the song is belittled.  Now that
a full flood of music has swept over our country, let Nikhil
practise his scales, while we rouse the land with our cracked
voices:

/*
  "My house cries to me: Why go out to lose your all?
  My life says: All that you have, fling to the winds!
  If we must lose our all, let us lose it: what is it worth after
    all?
  If I must court ruin, let me do it smilingly;
  For my quest is the death-draught of immortality.
*/

"The truth is, Nikhil, that we have all lost our hearts.  None
can hold us any longer within the bounds of the easily possible,
in our forward rush to the hopelessly impossible.

/*
  "Those who would draw us back,
  They know not the fearful joy of recklessness.
  They know not that we have had our call
  From the end of the crooked path.
  All that is good and straight and trim--
  Let it topple over in the dust."
*/

I thought that my husband was going to continue the discussion,
but he rose silently from his seat and left us.

The thing that was agitating me within was merely a variation of
the stormy passion outside, which swept the country from one end
to the other.  The car of the wielder of my destiny was fast
approaching, and the sound of its wheels reverberated in my
being.  I had a constant feeling that something extraordinary
might happen any moment, for which, however, the responsibility
would not be mine.  Was I not removed from the plane in which
right and wrong, and the feelings of others, have to be
considered?  Had I ever wanted this--had I ever been waiting or
hoping for any such thing?  Look at my whole life and tell me
then, if I was in any way accountable.

Through all my past I had been consistent in my devotion--but
when at length it came to receiving the boon, a different god
appeared!  And just as the awakened country, with its __Bande
Mataram__, thrills in salutation to the unrealized future
before it, so do all my veins and nerves send forth shocks of
welcome to the unthought-of, the unknown, the importunate
Stranger.

One night I left my bed and slipped out of my room on to the open
terrace.  Beyond our garden wall are fields of ripening rice.
Through the gaps in the village groves to the North, glimpses of
the river are seen.  The whole scene slept in the darkness like
the vague embryo of some future creation.

In that future I saw my country, a woman like myself, standing
expectant.  She has been drawn forth from her home corner by the
sudden call of some Unknown.  She has had no time to pause or
ponder, or to light herself a torch, as she rushes forward into
the darkness ahead.  I know well how her very soul responds to
the distant flute-strains which call her; how her breast rises
and falls; how she feels she nears it, nay it is already hers, so
that it matters not even if she run blindfold.  She is no mother.
There is no call to her of children in their hunger, no home to
be lighted of an evening, no household work to be done.  So; she
hies to her tryst, for this is the land of the Vaishnava Poets.
She has left home, forgotten domestic duties; she has nothing but
an unfathomable yearning which hurries her on--by what road, to
what goal, she recks not.

I, also, am possessed of just such a yearning.  I likewise have
lost my home and also lost my way.  Both the end and the means
have become equally shadowy to me.  There remain only the
yearning and the hurrying on.  Ah!  wretched wanderer through the
night, when the dawn reddens you will see no trace of a way to
return.  But why return?  Death will serve as well.  If the Dark
which sounded the flute should lead to destruction, why trouble
about the hereafter?  When I am merged in its blackness, neither
I, nor good and bad, nor laughter, nor tears, shall be any more!

------

18. The condition of the curse which had reduced them to ashes
was such that they could only be restored to life if the stream
of the Ganges was brought down to them.  [Trans.].

XII



In Bengal the machinery of time being thus suddenly run at full
pressure, things which were difficult became easy, one following
soon after another.  Nothing could be held back any more, even in
our corner of the country.  In the beginning our district was
backward, for my husband was unwilling to put any compulsion on
the villagers.  "Those who make sacrifices for their country's
sake are indeed her servants," he would say, "but those who
compel others to make them in her name are her enemies.  They
would cut freedom at the root, to gain it at the top."

But when Sandip came and settled here, and his followers began to
move about the country, speaking in towns and market-places,
waves of excitement came rolling up to us as well.  A band of
young fellows of the locality attached themselves to him, some
even who had been known as a disgrace to the village.  But the
glow of their genuine enthusiasm lighted them up, within as well
as without.  It became quite clear that when the pure breezes of
a great joy and hope sweep through the land, all dirt and decay
are cleansed away.  It is hard, indeed, for men to be frank and
straight and healthy, when their country is in the throes of
dejection.

Then were all eyes turned on my husband, from whose estates alone
foreign sugar and salt and cloths had not been banished.  Even
the estate officers began to feel awkward and ashamed over it.
And yet, some time ago, when my husband began to import country-
made articles into our village, he had been secretly and openly
twitted for his folly, by old and young alike.  When
__Swadeshi__ had not yet become a boast, we had despised it
with all our hearts.

My husband still sharpens his Indian-made pencils with his
Indian-made knife, does his writing with reed pens, drinks his
water out of a bell-metal vessel, and works at night in the light
of an old-fashioned castor-oil lamp.  But this dull, milk-and-
water __Swadeshi__ of his never appealed to us.  Rather, we
had always felt ashamed of the inelegant, unfashionable furniture
of his reception-rooms, especially when he had the magistrate, or
any other European, as his guest.

My husband used to make light of my protests.  "Why allow such
trifles to upset you?"  he would say with a smile.

"They will think us barbarians, or at all events wanting in
refinement."

"If they do, I will pay them back by thinking that their
refinement does not go deeper than their white skins."

My husband had an ordinary brass pot on his writing-table which
he used as a flower-vase.  It has often happened that, when I had
news of some European guest, I would steal into his room and put
in its place a crystal vase of European make.  "Look here,
Bimala," he objected at length, "that brass pot is as unconscious
of itself as those blossoms are; but this thing protests its
purpose so loudly, it is only fit for artificial flowers."

The Bara Rani, alone, pandered to my husband's whims.  Once she
comes panting to say: "Oh, brother, have you heard?  Such lovely
Indian soaps have come out!  My days of luxury are gone by;
still, if they contain no animal fat, I should like to try some."

This sort of thing makes my husband beam all over, and the house
is deluged with Indian scents and soaps.  Soaps indeed!  They are
more like lumps of caustic soda.  And do I not know that what my
sister-in-law uses on herself are the European soaps of old,
while these are made over to the maids for washing clothes?

Another time it is: "Oh, brother dear, do get me some of these
new Indian pen-holders."

Her "brother" bubbles up as usual, and the Bara Rani's room
becomes littered with all kinds of awful sticks that go by the
name of __Swadeshi__ pen-holders.  Not that it makes any
difference to her, for reading and writing are out of her line.
Still, in her writing-case, lies the selfsame ivory pen-holder,
the only one ever handled.

The fact is, all this was intended as a hit at me, because I
would not keep my husband company in his vagaries.  It was no
good trying to show up my sister-in-law's insincerity; my
husband's face would set so hard, if I barely touched on it.  One
only gets into trouble, trying to save such people from being
imposed upon!

The Bara Rani loves sewing.  One day I could not help blurting
out: "What a humbug you are, sister!  When your 'brother' is
present, your mouth waters at the very mention of __Swadeshi__
scissors, but it is the English-made article every time when you
work."

"What harm?"  she replied.  "Do you not see what pleasure it
gives him?  We have grown up together in this house, since he was
a boy.  I simply cannot bear, as you can, the sight of the smile
leaving his face.  Poor dear, he has no amusement except this
playing at shop-keeping.  You are his only dissipation, and you
will yet be his ruin!"

"Whatever you may say, it is not right to be double-faced," I
retorted.

My sister-in-law laughed out in my face.  "Oh, our artless little
Chota Rani!--straight as a schoolmaster's rod, eh?  But a woman
is not built that way.  She is soft and supple, so that she may
bend without being crooked."

I could not forget those words: "You are his dissipation, and
will be his ruin!"  Today I feel--if a man needs must have some
intoxicant, let it not be a woman.

XIII



Suksar, within our estates, is one of the biggest trade centres
in the district.  On one side of a stretch of water there is held
a daily bazar; on the other, a weekly market.  During the rains
when this piece of water gets connected with the river, and boats
can come through, great quantities of cotton yarns, and woollen
stuffs for the coming winter, are brought in for sale.

At the height of our enthusiasm, Sandip laid it down that all
foreign articles, together with the demon of foreign influence,
must be driven out of our territory.

"Of course!"  said I, girding myself up for a fight.

"I have had words with Nikhil about it," said Sandip.  "He tells
me, he does not mind speechifying, but he will not have
coercion."

"I will see to that," I said, with a proud sense of power.  I
knew how deep was my husband's love for me.  Had I been in my
senses I should have allowed myself to be torn to pieces rather
than assert my claim to that, at such a time.  But Sandip had to
be impressed with the full strength of my __Shakti__.

Sandip had brought home to me, in his irresistible way, how the
cosmic Energy was revealed for each individual in the shape of
some special affinity.  Vaishnava Philosophy, he said, speaks of
the __Shakti__ of Delight that dwells in the heart of
creation, ever attracting the heart of her Eternal Lover.  Men
have a perpetual longing to bring out this __Shakti__ from the
hidden depths of their own nature, and those of us who succeed in
doing so at once clearly understand the meaning of the music
coming to us from the Dark.  He broke out singing:

/*
  "My flute, that was busy with its song,
  Is silent now when we stand face to face.
  My call went seeking you from sky to sky
    When you lay hidden;
  But now all my cry finds its smile
    In the face of my beloved."
*/

Listening to his allegories, I had forgotten that I was plain and
simple Bimala.  I was __Shakti__; also an embodiment of
Universal joy.  Nothing could fetter me, nothing was impossible
for me; whatever I touched would gain new life.  The world around
me was a fresh creation of mine; for behold, before my heart's
response had touched it, there had not been this wealth of gold
in the Autumn sky!  And this hero, this true servant of the
country, this devotee of mine--this flaming intelligence, this
burning energy, this shining genius--him also was I creating from
moment to moment.  Have I not seen how my presence pours fresh
life into him time after time?

The other day Sandip begged me to receive a young lad, Amulya, an
ardent disciple of his.  In a moment I could see a new light
flash out from the boy's eyes, and knew that he, too, had a
vision of __Shakti__ manifest, that my creative force had
begun its work in his blood.  "What sorcery is this of yours!"
exclaimed Sandip next day.  "Amulya is a boy no longer, the wick
of his life is all ablaze.  Who can hide your fire under your
home-roof?  Every one of them must be touched up by it, sooner or
later, and when every lamp is alight what a grand carnival of a
__Dewali__ we shall have in the country!"

Blinded with the brilliance of my own glory I had decided to
grant my devotee this boon.  I was overweeningly confident that
none could baulk me of what I really wanted.  When I returned to
my room after my talk with Sandip, I loosed my hair and tied it
up over again.  Miss Gilby had taught me a way of brushing it up
from the neck and piling it in a knot over my head.  This style
was a favourite one with my husband.  "It is a pity," he once
said, "that Providence should have chosen poor me, instead of
poet Kalidas, for revealing all the wonders of a woman's neck.
The poet would probably have likened it to a flower-stem; but I
feel it to be a torch, holding aloft the black flame of your
hair."  With which he ...  but why, oh why, do I go back to all
that?

I sent for my husband.  In the old days I could contrive a
hundred and one excuses, good or bad, to get him to come to me.
Now that all this had stopped for days I had lost the art of
contriving.



Nikhil's Story

VI



Panchu's wife has just died of a lingering consumption.  Panchu
must undergo a purification ceremony to cleanse himself of sin
and to propitiate his community.  The community has calculated
and informed him that it will cost one hundred and twenty-three
rupees.

"How absurd!"  I cried, highly indignant.  "Don't submit to this,
Panchu.  What can they do to you?"

Raising to me his patient eyes like those of a tired-out beast of
burden, he said: "There is my eldest girl, sir, she will have to
be married.  And my poor wife's last rites have to be put
through."

"Even if the sin were yours, Panchu," I mused aloud, "you have
surely suffered enough for it already."

"That is so, sir," he naïvely assented.  "I had to sell part of
my land and mortgage the rest to meet the doctor's bills.  But
there is no escape from the offerings I have to make the
Brahmins."

What was the use of arguing?  When will come the time, I
wondered, for the purification of the Brahmins themselves who can
accept such offerings?

After his wife's illness and funeral, Panchu, who had been
tottering on the brink of starvation, went altogether beyond his
depth.  In a desperate attempt to gain consolation of some sort
he took to sitting at the feet of a wandering ascetic, and
succeeded in acquiring philosophy enough to forget that his
children went hungry.  He kept himself steeped for a time in the
idea that the world is vanity, and if of pleasure it has none,
pain also is a delusion.  Then, at last, one night he left his
little ones in their tumble-down hovel, and started off wandering
on his own account.

I knew nothing of this at the time, for just then a veritable
ocean-churning by gods and demons was going on in my mind.  Nor
did my master tell me that he had taken Panchu's deserted
children under his own roof and was caring for them, though alone
in the house, with his school to attend to the whole day.

After a month Panchu came back, his ascetic fervour considerably
worn off.  His eldest boy and girl nestled up to him, crying:
"Where have you been all this time, father?"  His youngest boy
filled his lap; his second girl leant over his back with her arms
around his neck; and they all wept together.  "O sir!"  sobbed
Panchu, at length, to my master.  "I have not the power to give
these little ones enough to eat--I am not free to run away from
them.  What has been my sin that I should be scourged so, bound
hand and foot?"

In the meantime the thread of Panchu's little trade connections
had snapped and he found he could not resume them.  He clung on
to the shelter of my master's roof, which had first received him
on his return, and said not a word of going back home.  "Look
here, Panchu," my master was at last driven to say.  "If you
don't take care of your cottage, it will tumble down altogether.
I will lend you some money with which you can do a bit of
peddling and return it me little by little."

Panchu was not excessively pleased--was there then no such thing
as charity on earth?  And when my master asked him to write out a
receipt for the money, he felt that this favour, demanding a
return, was hardly worth having.  My master, however, did not
care to make an outward gift which would leave an inward
obligation.  To destroy self-respect is to destroy caste, was his
idea.

After signing the note, Panchu's obeisance to my master fell off
considerably in its reverence--the dust-taking was left out.  It
made my master smile; he asked nothing better than that courtesy
should stoop less low.  "Respect given and taken truly balances
the account between man and man," was the way he put it, "but
veneration is overpayment."

Panchu began to buy cloth at the market and peddle it about the
village.  He did not get much of cash payment, it is true, but
what he could realize in kind, in the way of rice, jute, and
other field produce, went towards settlement of his account.  In
two month's time he was able to pay back an instalment of my
master's debt, and with it there was a corresponding reduction in
the depth of his bow.  He must have begun to feel that he had
been revering as a saint a mere man, who had not even risen
superior to the lure of lucre.

While Panchu was thus engaged, the full shock of the
__Swadeshi__ flood fell on him.

VII



It was vacation time, and many youths of our village and its
neighbourhood had come home from their schools and colleges.
They attached themselves to Sandip's leadership with enthusiasm,
and some, in their excess of zeal, gave up their studies
altogether.  Many of the boys had been free pupils of my school
here, and some held college scholarships from me in Calcutta.
They came up in a body, and demanded that I should banish foreign
goods from my Suksar market.

I told them I could not do it.

They were sarcastic: "Why, Maharaja, will the loss be too much
for you?"

I took no notice of the insult in their tone, and was about to
reply that the loss would fall on the poor traders and their
customers, not on me, when my master, who was present,
interposed.

"Yes, the loss will be his--not yours, that is clear enough," he
said.

"But for one's country .  ."

"The country does not mean the soil, but the men on it,"
interrupted my master again.  "Have you yet wasted so much as a
glance on what was happening to them?  But now you would dictate
what salt they shall eat, what clothes they shall wear.  Why
should they put up with such tyranny, and why should we let
them?"

"But we have taken to Indian salt and sugar and cloth ourselves."

"You may do as you please to work off your irritation, to keep up
your fanaticism.  You are well off, you need not mind the cost.
The poor do not want to stand in your way, but you insist on
their submitting to your compulsion.  As it is, every moment of
theirs is a life-and-death struggle for a bare living; you cannot
even imagine the difference a few pice means to them--so little
have you in common.  You have spent your whole past in a superior
compartment, and now you come down to use them as tools for the
wreaking of your wrath.  I call it cowardly."

They were all old pupils of my master, so they did not venture to
be disrespectful, though they were quivering with indignation.
They turned to me.  "Will you then be the only one, Maharaja, to
put obstacles in the way of what the country would achieve?"

"Who am I, that I should dare do such a thing?  Would I not
rather lay down my life to help it?"

The M.A.  student smiled a crooked smile, as he asked: "May we
enquire what you are actually doing to help?"

"I have imported Indian mill-made yarn and kept it for sale in my
Suksar market, and also sent bales of it to markets belonging to
neighbouring __zamindars__."

"But we have been to your market, Maharaja," the same student
exclaimed, "and found nobody buying this yarn."

"That is neither my fault nor the fault of my market.  It only
shows the whole country has not taken your vow."

"That is not all," my master went on.  "It shows that what you
have pledged yourselves to do is only to pester others.  You want
dealers, who have not taken your vow, to buy that yarn; weavers,
who have not taken your vow, to make it up; then their wares
eventually to be foisted on to consumers who, also, have not
taken your vow.  The method?  Your clamour, and the
__zamindars'__ oppression.  The result: all righteousness
yours, all privations theirs!"

"And may we venture to ask, further, what your share of the
privation has been?"  pursued a science student.

"You want to know, do you?"  replied my master.  "It is Nikhil
himself who has to buy up that Indian mill yarn; he has had to
start a weaving school to get it woven; and to judge by his past
brilliant business exploits, by the time his cotton fabrics leave
the loom their cost will be that of cloth-of-gold; so they will
only find a use, perhaps, as curtains for his drawing-room, even
though their flimsiness may fail to screen him.  When you get
tired of your vow, you will laugh the loudest at their artistic
effect.  And if their workmanship is ever truly appreciated at
all, it will be by foreigners."

I have known my master all my life, but have never seen him so
agitated.  I could see that the pain had been silently
accumulating in his heart for some time, because of his
surpassing love for me, and that his habitual self-possession had
become secretly undermined to the breaking point.

"You are our elders," said the medical student.  "It is unseemly
that we should bandy words with you.  But tell us, pray, finally,
are you determined not to oust foreign articles from your
market?"

"I will not," I said, "because they are not mine."

"Because that will cause you a loss!"  smiled the M.A.  student.

"Because he, whose is the loss, is the best judge," retorted my
master.

With a shout of __Bande Mataram__ they left us.



Chapter Six

Nikhil's Story

VIII



A FEW days later, my master brought Panchu round to me.  His
__zamindar__, it appeared, had fined him a hundred rupees, and
was threatening him with ejectment.

"For what fault?"  I enquired.

"Because," I was told, "he has been found selling foreign cloths.
He begged and prayed Harish Kundu, his __zamindar__, to let
him sell off his stock, bought with borrowed money, promising
faithfully never to do it again; but the __zamindar__ would
not hear of it, and insisted on his burning the foreign stuff
there and then, if he wanted to be let off.  Panchu in his
desperation blurted out defiantly: "I can't afford it!  You are
rich; why not buy it up and burn it?"  This only made Harish
Kundu red in the face as he shouted: "The scoundrel must be
taught manners, give him a shoe-beating!"  So poor Panchu got
insulted as well as fined.

"What happened to the cloth?"

"The whole bale was burnt."

"Who else was there?"

"Any number of people, who all kept shouting __Bande
Mataram__.  Sandip was also there.  He took up some of the
ashes, crying: 'Brothers!  This is the first funeral pyre lighted
by your village in celebration of the last rites of foreign
commerce.  These are sacred ashes.  Smear yourselves with them in
token of your __Swadeshi__ vow.'"

"Panchu," said I, turning to him, "you must lodge a complaint."

"No one will bear me witness," he replied.

"None bear witness?--Sandip!  Sandip!"

Sandip came out of his room at my call.  "What is the matter?"
he asked.

"Won't you bear witness to the burning of this man's cloth?"

Sandip smiled.  "Of course I shall be a witness in the case," he
said.  "But I shall be on the opposite side."

"What do you mean," I exclaimed, "by being a witness on this or
that side?  Will you not bear witness to the truth?"

"Is the thing which happens the only truth?"

"What other truths can there be?"

"The things that ought to happen!  The truth we must build up
will require a great deal of untruth in the process.  Those who
have made their way in the world have created truth, not blindly
followed it."

"And so--"

"And so I will bear what you people are pleased to call false
witness, as they have done who have created empires, built up
social systems, founded religious organizations.  Those who would
rule do not dread untruths; the shackles of truth are reserved
for those who will fall under their sway.  Have you not read
history?  Do you not know that in the immense cauldrons, where
vast political developments are simmering, untruths are the main
ingredients?"

"Political cookery on a large scale is doubtless going on, but--"

"Oh, I know!  You, of course, will never do any of the cooking.
You prefer to be one of those down whose throats the hotchpotch
which is being cooked will be crammed.  They will partition
Bengal and say it is for your benefit.  They will seal the doors
of education and call it raising the standard.  But you will
always remain good boys, snivelling in your corners.  We bad men,
however, must see whether we cannot erect a defensive
fortification of untruth."

"It is no use arguing about these things, Nikhil," my master
interposed.  "How can they who do not feel the truth within them,
realize that to bring it out from its obscurity into the light is
man's highest aim--not to keep on heaping material outside?"

Sandip laughed.  "Right, sir!"  said he.  "Quite a correct speech
for a schoolmaster.  That is the kind of stuff I have read in
books; but in the real world I have seen that man's chief
business is the accumulation of outside material.  Those who are
masters in the art, advertise the biggest lies in their business,
enter false accounts in their political ledgers with their
broadest-pointed pens, launch their newspapers daily laden with
untruths, and send preachers abroad to disseminate falsehood like
flies carrying pestilential germs.  I am a humble follower of
these great ones.  When I was attached to the Congress party I
never hesitated to dilute ten per cent of truth with ninety per
cent of untruth.  And now, merely because I have ceased to belong
to that party, I have not forgotten the basic fact that man's
goal is not truth but success."

"True success," corrected my master.

"Maybe," replied Sandip, "but the fruit of true success ripens
only by cultivating the field of untruth, after tearing up the
soil and pounding it into dust.  Truth grows up by itself like
weeds and thorns, and only worms can expect to get fruit from
it!"  With this he flung out of the room.

My master smiled as he looked towards me.  "Do you know, Nikhil,"
he said, "I believe Sandip is not irreligious--his religion is of
the obverse side of truth, like the dark moon, which is still a
moon, for all that its light has gone over to the wrong side."

"That is why," I assented, "I have always had an affection for
him, though we have never been able to agree.  I cannot contemn
him, even now; though he has hurt me sorely, and may yet hurt me
more."

"I have begun to realize that," said my master.  "I have long
wondered how you could go on putting up with him.  I have, at
times, even suspected you of weakness.  I now see that though you
two do not rhyme, your rhythm is the same."

"Fate seems bent on writing __Paradise Lost__ in blank verse,
in my case, and so has no use for a rhyming friend!"  I remarked,
pursuing his conceit.

"But what of Panchu?"  resumed my master.

"You say Harish Kundu wants to eject him from his ancestral
holding.  Supposing I buy it up and then keep him on as my
tenant?"

"And his fine?"

"How can the __zamindar__ realize that if he becomes my
tenant?"

"His burnt bale of cloth?"

"I will procure him another.  I should like to see anyone
interfering with a tenant of mine, for trading as he pleases!"

"I am afraid, sir," interposed Panchu despondently, "while you
big folk are doing the fighting, the police and the law vultures
will merrily gather round, and the crowd will enjoy the fun, but
when it comes to getting killed, it will be the turn of only poor
me!"

"Why, what harm can come to you?"

"They will burn down my house, sir, children and all!"

"Very well, I will take charge of your children," said my master.
"You may go on with any trade you like.  They shan't touch you."

That very day I bought up Panchu's holding and entered into
formal possession.  Then the trouble began.

Panchu had inherited the holding of his grandfather as his sole
surviving heir.  Everybody knew this.  But at this juncture an
aunt turned up from somewhere, with her boxes and bundles, her
rosary, and a widowed niece.  She ensconced herself in Panchu's
home and laid claim to a life interest in all he had.

Panchu was dumbfounded.  "My aunt died long ago," he protested.

In reply he was told that he was thinking of his uncle's first
wife, but that the former had lost no time in taking to himself a
second.

"But my uncle died before my aunt," exclaimed Panchu, still more
mystified.  "Where was the time for him to marry again?"

This was not denied.  But Panchu was reminded that it had never
been asserted that the second wife had come after the death of
the first, but the former had been married by his uncle during
the latter's lifetime.  Not relishing the idea of living with a
co-wife she had remained in her father's house till her husband's
death, after which she had got religion and retired to holy
Brindaban, whence she was now coming.  These facts were well
known to the officers of Harish Kundu, as well as to some of his
tenants.  And if the __zamindar's__ summons should be
peremptory enough, even some of those who had partaken of the
marriage feast would be forthcoming!

IX



One afternoon, when I happened to be specially busy, word came to
my office room that Bimala had sent for me.  I was startled.

"Who did you say had sent for me?"  I asked the messenger.

"The Rani Mother."

"The Bara Rani?"

"No, sir, the Chota Rani Mother."

The Chota Rani!  It seemed a century since I had been sent for by
her.  I kept them all waiting there, and went off into the inner
apartments.  When I stepped into our room I had another shock of
surprise to find Bimala there with a distinct suggestion of being
dressed up.  The room, which from persistent neglect had latterly
acquired an air of having grown absent-minded, had regained
something of its old order this afternoon.  I stood there
silently, looking enquiringly at Bimala.

She flushed a little and the fingers of her right hand toyed for
a time with the bangles on her left arm.  Then she abruptly broke
the silence.  "Look here!  Is it right that ours should be the
only market in all Bengal which allows foreign goods?"

"What, then, would be the right thing to do?"  I asked.

"Order them to be cleared out!"

"But the goods are not mine."

"Is not the market yours?"

"It is much more theirs who use it for trade."

"Let them trade in Indian goods, then."

"Nothing would please me better.  But suppose they do not?"

"Nonsense!  How dare they be so insolent?  Are you not ..."

"I am very busy this afternoon and cannot stop to argue it out.
But I must refuse to tyrannize."

"It would not be tyranny for selfish gain, but for the sake of
the country."

"To tyrannize for the country is to tyrannize over the country.
But that I am afraid you will never understand."  With this I
came away.

All of a sudden the world shone out for me with a fresh
clearness.  I seemed to feel it in my blood, that the Earth had
lost the weight of its earthiness, and its daily task of
sustaining life no longer appeared a burden, as with a wonderful
access of power it whirled through space telling its beads of
days and nights.  What endless work, and withal what illimitable
energy of freedom!  None shall check it, oh, none can ever check
it!  From the depths of my being an uprush of joy, like a
waterspout, sprang high to storm the skies.

I repeatedly asked myself the meaning of this outburst of
feeling.  At first there was no intelligible answer.  Then it
became clear that the bond against which I had been fretting
inwardly, night and day, had broken.  To my surprise I discovered
that my mind was freed from all mistiness.  I could see
everything relating to Bimala as if vividly pictured on a camera
screen.  It was palpable that she had specially dressed herself
up to coax that order out of me.  Till that moment, I had never
viewed Bimala's adornment as a thing apart from herself.  But
today the elaborate manner in which she had done up her hair, in
the English fashion, made it appear a mere decoration.  That
which before had the mystery of her personality about it, and was
priceless to me, was now out to sell itself cheap.

As I came away from that broken cage of a bedroom, out into the
golden sunlight of the open, there was the avenue of bauhinias,
along the gravelled path in front of my verandah, suffusing the
sky with a rosy flush.  A group of starlings beneath the trees
were noisily chattering away.  In the distance an empty bullock
cart, with its nose on the ground, held up its tail aloft--one of
its unharnessed bullocks grazing, the other resting on the grass,
its eyes dropping for very comfort, while a crow on its back was
pecking away at the insects on its body.

I seemed to have come closer to the heartbeats of the great earth
in all the simplicity of its daily life; its warm breath fell on
me with the perfume of the bauhinia blossoms; and an anthem,
inexpressibly sweet, seemed to peal forth from this world, where
I, in my freedom, live in the freedom of all else.

We, men, are knights whose quest is that freedom to which our
ideals call us.  She who makes for us the banner under which we
fare forth is the true Woman for us.  We must tear away the
disguise of her who weaves our net of enchantment at home, and
know her for what she is.  We must beware of clothing her in the
witchery of our own longings and imaginings, and thus allow her
to distract us from our true quest.

Today I feel that I shall win through.  I have come to the
gateway of the simple; I am now content to see things as they
are.  I have gained freedom myself; I shall allow freedom to
others.  In my work will be my salvation.

I know that, time and again, my heart will ache, but now that I
understand its pain in all its truth, I can disregard it.  Now
that I know it concerns only me, what after all can be its value?
The suffering which belongs to all mankind shall be my crown.

Save me, Truth!  Never again let me hanker after the false
paradise of Illusion.  If I must walk alone, let me at least
tread your path.  Let the drum-beats of Truth lead me to Victory.



Sandip's Story

VII



Bimala sent for me that day, but for a time she could not utter a
word; her eyes kept brimming up to the verge of overflowing.  I
could see at once that she had been unsuccessful with Nikhil.
She had been so proudly confident that she would have her own
way--but I had never shared her confidence.  Woman knows man well
enough where he is weak, but she is quite unable to fathom him
where he is strong.  The fact is that man is as much a mystery to
woman as woman is to man.  If that were not so, the separation of
the sexes would only have been a waste of Nature's energy.

Ah pride, pride!  The trouble was, not that the necessary thing
had failed of accomplishment, but that the entreaty, which had
cost her such a struggle to make, should have been refused.  What
a wealth of colour and movement, suggestion and deception, group
themselves round this "me" and "mine" in woman.  That is just
where her beauty lies--she is ever so much more personal than
man.  When man was being made, the Creator was a schoolmaster--
His bag full of commandments and principles; but when He came to
woman, He resigned His headmastership and turned artist, with
only His brush and paint-box.

When Bimala stood silently there, flushed and tearful in her
broken pride, like a storm-cloud, laden with rain and charged
with lightning, lowering over the horizon, she looked so
absolutely sweet that I had to go right up to her and take her
by the hand.  It was trembling, but she did not snatch it away.

"Bee," said I, "we two are colleagues, for our aims are one.
Let us sit down and talk it over."

I led her, unresisting, to a seat.  But strange!  at that very
point the rush of my impetuosity suffered an unaccountable check
--just as the current of the mighty Padma, roaring on in its
irresistible course, all of a sudden gets turned away from the
bank it is crumbling by some trifling obstacle beneath the
surface.  When I pressed Bimala's hand my nerves rang music, like
tuned-up strings; but the symphony stopped short at the first
movement.

What stood in the way?  Nothing singly; it was a tangle of a
multitude of things--nothing definitely palpable, but only that
unaccountable sense of obstruction.  Anyhow, this much has become
plain to me, that I cannot swear to what I really am.  It is
because I am such a mystery to my own mind that my attraction for
myself is so strong!  If once the whole of myself should become
known to me, I would then fling it all away--and reach beatitude!

As she sat down, Bimala went ashy pale.  She, too, must have
realized what a crisis had come and gone, leaving her unscathed.
The comet had passed by, but the brush of its burning tail had
overcome her.  To help her to recover herself I said: "Obstacles
there will be, but let us fight them through, and not be down-
hearted.  Is not that best, Queen?"

Bimala cleared her throat with a little cough, but simply to
murmur: "Yes."

"Let us sketch out our plan of action," I continued, as I drew a
piece of paper and a pencil from my pocket.

I began to make a list of the workers who had joined us from
Calcutta and to assign their duties to each.  Bimala interrupted
me before I was through, saying wearily: "Leave it now; I will
join you again this evening" and then she hurried out of the
room.  It was evident she was not in a state to attend to
anything.  She must be alone with herself for a while--perhaps
lie down on her bed and have a good cry!

When she left me, my intoxication began to deepen, as the cloud
colours grow richer after the sun is down.  I felt I had let the
moment of moments slip by.  What an awful coward I had been!  She
must have left me in sheer disgust at my qualms--and she was
right!

While I was tingling all over with these reflections, a servant
came in and announced Amulya, one of our boys.  I felt like
sending him away for the time, but he stepped in before I could
make up my mind.  Then we fell to discussing the news of the
fights which were raging in different quarters over cloth and
sugar and salt; and the air was soon clear of all fumes of
intoxication.  I felt as if awakened from a dream.  I leapt to my
feet feeling quite ready for the fray--Bande Mataram!

The news was various.  Most of the traders who were tenants of
Harish Kundu had come over to us.  Many of Nikhil's officials
were also secretly on our side, pulling the wires in our
interest.  The Marwari shopkeepers were offering to pay a
penalty, if only allowed to clear their present stocks.  Only
some Mahomedan traders were still obdurate.

One of them was taking home some German-made shawls for his
family.  These were confiscated and burnt by one of our village
boys.  This had given rise to trouble.  We offered to buy him
Indian woollen stuffs in their place.  But where were cheap
Indian woollens to be had?  We could not very well indulge him in
Cashmere shawls!  He came and complained to Nikhil, who advised
him to go to law.  Of course Nikhil's men saw to it that the
trial should come to nothing, even his law-agent being on our
side!

The point is, if we have to replace burnt foreign clothes with
Indian cloth every time, and on the top of that fight through a
law-suit, where is the money to come from?  And the beauty of it
is that this destruction of foreign goods is increasing their
demand and sending up the foreigner's profits--very like what
happened to the fortunate shopkeeper whose chandeliers the nabob
delighted in smashing, tickled by the tinkle of the breaking
glass.

The next problem is--since there is no such thing as cheap and
gaudy Indian woollen stuff, should we be rigorous in our boycott
of foreign flannels and memos, or make an exception in their
favour?

"Look here!"  said I at length on the first point, "we are not
going to keep on making presents of Indian stuff to those who
have got their foreign purchases confiscated.  The penalty is
intended to fall on them, not on us.  If they go to law, we must
retaliate by burning down their granaries!--What startles you,
Amulya?  It is not the prospect of a grand illumination that
delights me!  You must remember, this is War.  If you are afraid
of causing suffering, go in for love-making, you will never do
for this work!"

The second problem I solved by deciding to allow no compromise
with foreign articles, in any circumstance whatever.  In the good
old days, when these gaily coloured foreign shawls were unknown,
our peasantry used to manage well enough with plain cotton
quilts--they must learn to do so again.  They may not look as
gorgeous, but this is not the time to think of looks.

Most of the boatmen had been won over to refuse to carry foreign
goods, but the chief of them, Mirjan, was still insubordinate.

"Could you not get his boat sunk?"  I asked our manager here.

"Nothing easier, sir," he replied.  "But what if afterwards I am
held responsible?"

"Why be so clumsy as to leave any loophole for responsibility?
However, if there must be any, my shoulders will be there to bear
it."

Mirjan's boat was tied near the landing-place after its freight
had been taken over to the market-place.  There was no one on it,
for the manager had arranged for some entertainment to which all
had been invited.  After dusk the boat, loaded with rubbish, was
holed and set adrift.  It sank in mid-stream.

Mirjan understood the whole thing.  He came to me in tears to beg
for mercy.  "I was wrong, sir--" he began.

"What makes you realize that all of a sudden?"  I sneered.

He made no direct reply.  "The boat was worth two thousand
rupees," he said.  "I now see my mistake, and if excused this
time I will never ..."  with which he threw himself at my feet.

I asked him to come ten days later.  If only we could pay him
that two thousand rupees at once, we could buy him up body and
soul.  This is just the sort of man who could render us immense
service, if won over.  We shall never be able to make any headway
unless we can lay our hands on plenty of money.

As soon as Bimala came into the sitting-room, in the evening, I
said as I rose up to receive her: "Queen!  Everything is ready,
success is at hand, but we must have money.

"Money?  How much money?"

"Not so very much, but by hook or by crook we must have it!"

"But how much?"

"A mere fifty thousand rupees will do for the present."

Bimala blenched inwardly at the figure, but tried not to show it.
How could she again admit defeat?

"Queen!"  said I, "you only can make the impossible possible.
Indeed you have already done so.  Oh, that I could show you the
extent of your achievement--then you would know it.  But the time
for that is not now.  Now we want money!"

"You shall have it," she said.

I could see that the thought of selling her jewels had occurred
to her.  So I said: "Your jewels must remain in reserve.  One can
never tell when they may be wanted."  And then, as Bimala stared
blankly at me in silence, I went on: "This money must come from
your husband's treasury."

Bimala was still more taken aback.  After a long pause she said:
"But how am Ito get his money?"

"Is not his money yours as well?"

"Ah, no!"  she said, her wounded pride hurt afresh.

"If not," I cried, "neither is it his, but his country's, whom he
has deprived of it, in her time of need!"

"But how am Ito get it?"  she repeated.

"Get it you shall and must.  You know best how.  You must get it
for Her to whom it rightfully belongs.  __Bande Mataram__!
These are the magic words which will open the door of his iron
safe, break through the walls of his strong-room, and confound
the hearts of those who are disloyal to its call.  Say __Bande
Mataram__, Bee!"

"__Bande Mataram__!"



Chapter Seven

Sandip's Story

VIII



WE are men, we are kings, we must have our tribute.  Ever since
we have come upon the Earth we have been plundering her; and the
more we claimed, the more she submitted.  From primeval days have
we men been plucking fruits, cutting down trees, digging up the
soil, killing beast, bird and fish.  From the bottom of the sea,
from underneath the ground, from the very jaws of death, it has
all been grabbing and grabbing and grabbing--no strong-box in
Nature's store-room has been respected or left unrifled.  The one
delight of this Earth is to fulfil the claims of those who are
men.  She has been made fertile and beautiful and complete
through her endless sacrifices to them.  But for this, she would
be lost in the wilderness, not knowing herself, the doors of her
heart shut, her diamonds and pearls never seeing the light.

Likewise, by sheer force of our claims, we men have opened up all
the latent possibilities of women.  In the process of
surrendering themselves to us, they have ever gained their true
greatness.  Because they had to bring all the diamonds of their
happiness and the pearls of their sorrow into our royal treasury,
they have found their true wealth.  So for men to accept is truly
to give: for women to give is truly to gain.

The demand I have just made from Bimala, however, is indeed a
large one!  At first I felt scruples; for is it not the habit of
man's mind to be in purposeless conflict with itself?  I thought
I had imposed too hard a task.  My first impulse was to call her
back, and tell her I would rather not make her life wretched by
dragging her into all these troubles.  I forgot, for the moment,
that it was the mission of man to be aggressive, to make woman's
existence fruitful by stirring up disquiet in the depth of her
passivity, to make the whole world blessed by churning up the
immeasurable abyss of suffering!  This is why man's hands are so
strong, his grip so firm.  Bimala had been longing with all her
heart that I, Sandip, should demand of her some great sacrifice--
should call her to her death.  How else could she be happy?  Had
she not waited all these weary years only for an opportunity to
weep out her heart--so satiated was she with the monotony of her
placid happiness?  And therefore, at the very sight of me, her
heart's horizon darkened with the rain clouds of her impending
days of anguish.  If I pity her and save her from her sorrows,
what then was the purpose of my being born a man?

The real reason of my qualms is that my demand happens to be for
money.  That savours of beggary, for money is man's, not woman's.
That is why I had to make it a big figure.  A thousand or two
would have the air of petty theft.  Fifty thousand has all the
expanse of romantic brigandage.  Ah, but riches should really
have been mine!  So many of my desires have had to halt, again
and again, on the road to accomplishment simply for want of
money.  This does not become me!  Had my fate been merely unjust,
it could be forgiven--but its bad taste is unpardonable.  It is
not simply a hardship that a man like me should be at his wit's
end to pay his house rent, or should have to carefully count out
the coins for an Intermediate Class railway ticket--it is vulgar!

It is equally clear that Nikhil's paternal estates are a
superfluity to him.  For him it would not have been at all
unbecoming to be poor.  He would have cheerfully pulled in the
double harness of indigent mediocrity with that precious master
of his.  I should love to have, just for once, the chance to
fling about fifty thousand rupees in the service of my country
and to the satisfaction of myself.  I am a nabob born, and it is
a great dream of mine to get rid of this disguise of poverty,
though it be for a day only, and to see myself in my true
character.  I have grave misgivings, however, as to Bimala ever
getting that fifty thousand rupees within her reach, and it will
probably be only a thousand or two which will actually come to
hand.  Be it so.  The wise man is content with half a loaf, or
any fraction for that matter, rather than no bread.  I must
return to these personal reflections of mine later.  News comes
that I am wanted at once.  Something has gone wrong ...

It seems that the police have got a clue to the man who sank
Mirjan's boat for us.  He was an old offender.  They are on his
trail, but he should be too practised a hand to be caught
blabbing.  However, one never knows.  Nikhil's back is up, and
his manager may not be able to have things his own way.

"If I get into trouble, sir," said the manager when I saw him, "I
shall have to drag you in!"

"Where is the noose with which you can catch me?"  I asked.

"I have a letter of yours, and several of Amulya Babu's."  I
could not see that the letter marked "urgent" to which I had been
hurried into writing a reply was wanted urgently for this purpose
only!  I am getting to learn quite a number of things.

The point now is, that the police must be bribed and hush-money
paid to Mirjan for his boat.  It is also becoming evident that
much of the cost of this patriotic venture of ours will find its
way as profit into the pockets of Nikhil's manager.  However, I
must shut my eyes to that for the present, for is he not shouting
__Bande Mataram__ as lustily as I am?

This kind of work has always to be carried on with leaky vessels
which let as much through as they fetch in.  We all have a hidden
fund of moral judgement stored away within us, and so I was about
to wax indignant with the manager, and enter in my diary a tirade
against the unreliability of our countrymen.  But, if there be a
god, I must acknowledge with gratitude to him that he has given
me a clear-seeing mind, which allows nothing inside or outside it
to remain vague.  I may delude others, but never myself.  So I
was unable to continue angry.

Whatever is true is neither good nor bad, but simply true, and
that is Science.  A lake is only the remnant of water which has
not been sucked into the ground.  Underneath the cult of __Bande
Mataram__, as indeed at the bottom of all mundane affairs,
there is a region of slime, whose absorbing power must be
reckoned with.  The manager will take what he wants; I also have
my own wants.  These lesser wants form a part of the wants of the
great Cause--the horse must be fed and the wheels must be oiled
if the best progress is to be made.

The long and short of it is that money we must have, and that
soon.  We must take whatever comes the readiest, for we cannot
afford to wait.  I know that the immediate often swallows up the
ultimate; that the five thousand rupees of today may nip in the
bud the fifty thousand rupees of tomorrow.  But I must accept the
penalty.  Have I not often twitted Nikhil that they who walk in
the paths of restraint have never known what sacrifice is?  It is
we greedy folk who have to sacrifice our greed at every step!

Of the cardinal sins of man, Desire is for men who are men--but
Delusion, which is only for cowards, hampers them.  Because
delusion keeps them wrapped up in past and future, but is the
very deuce for confounding their footsteps in the present.  Those
who are always straining their ears for the call of the remote,
to the neglect of the call of the imminent, are like Sakuntala
[19] absorbed in the memories of her lover.  The guest comes
unheeded, and the curse descends, depriving them of the very
object of their desire.

The other day I pressed Bimala's hand, and that touch still stirs
her mind, as it vibrates in mine.  Its thrill must not be
deadened by repetition, for then what is now music will descend
to mere argument.  There is at present no room in her mind for
the question "why?"  So I must not deprive Bimala, who is one of
those creatures for whom illusion is necessary, of her full
supply of it.

As for me, I have so much else to do that I shall have to be
content for the present with the foam of the wine cup of passion.
O man of desire!  Curb your greed, and practise your hand on the
harp of illusion till you can bring out all the delicate nuances
of suggestion.  This is not the time to drain the cup to the
dregs.

------

19. Sakuntala, after the king, her lover, went back to his
kingdom, promising to send for her, was so lost in thoughts of
him, that she failed to hear the call of her hermit guest who
thereupon cursed her, saying that the object of her love would
forget all about her.  [Trans.].

IX



Our work proceeds apace.  But though we have shouted ourselves
hoarse, proclaiming the Mussulmans to be our brethren, we have
come to realize that we shall never be able to bring them wholly
round to our side.  So they must be suppressed altogether and
made to understand that we are the masters.  They are now showing
their teeth, but one day they shall dance like tame bears to the
tune we play.

"If the idea of a United India is a true one," objects Nikhil,
"Mussulmans are a necessary part of it."

"Quite so," said I, "but we must know their place and keep them
there, otherwise they will constantly be giving trouble."

"So you want to make trouble to prevent trouble?"

"What, then, is your plan?"

"There is only one well-known way of avoiding quarrels," said
Nikhil meaningly.

I know that, like tales written by good people, Nikhil's
discourse always ends in a moral.  The strange part of it is that
with all his familiarity with moral precepts, he still believes
in them!  He is an incorrigible schoolboy.  His only merit is his
sincerity.  The mischief with people like him is that they will
not admit the finality even of death, but keep their eyes always
fixed on a hereafter.

I have long been nursing a plan which, if only I could carry it
out, would set fire to the whole country.  True patriotism will
never be roused in our countrymen unless they can visualize the
motherland.  We must make a goddess of her.  My colleagues saw
the point at once.  "Let us devise an appropriate image!"  they
exclaimed.  "It will not do if you devise it," I admonished
them.  "We must get one of the current images accepted as
representing the country--the worship of the people must flow
towards it along the deep-cut grooves of custom."

But Nikhil's needs must argue even about this.  "We must not seek
the help of illusions," he said to me some time ago, "for what we
believe to be the true cause."

"Illusions are necessary for lesser minds," I said, "and to this
class the greater portion of the world belongs.  That is why
divinities are set up in every country to keep up the illusions
of the people, for men are only too well aware of their
weakness."

"No," he replied.  "God is necessary to clear away our illusions.
The divinities which keep them alive are false gods."

"What of that?  If need be, even false gods must be invoked,
rather than let the work suffer.  Unfortunately for us, our
illusions are alive enough, but we do not know how to make them
serve our purpose.  Look at the Brahmins.  In spite of our
treating them as demi-gods, and untiringly taking the dust of
their feet, they are a force going to waste.

"There will always be a large class of people, given to
grovelling, who can never be made to do anything unless they are
bespattered with the dust of somebody's feet, be it on their
heads or on their backs!  What a pity if after keeping Brahmins
saved up in our armoury for all these ages--keen and serviceable
--they cannot be utilized to urge on this rabble in the time of
our need."

But it is impossible to drive all this into Nikhil's head.  He
has such a prejudice in favour of truth--as though there exists
such an objective reality!  How often have I tried to explain to
him that where untruth truly exists, there it is indeed the
truth.  This was understood in our country in the old days, and
so they had the courage to declare that for those of little
understanding untruth is the truth.  For them, who can truly
believe their country to be a goddess, her image will do duty for
the truth.  With our nature and our traditions we are unable to
realize our country as she is, but we can easily bring ourselves
to believe in her image.  Those who want to do real work must not
ignore this fact.

Nikhil only got excited.  "Because you have lost the power of
walking in the path of truth's attainment," he cried, "you keep
waiting for some miraculous boon to drop from the skies!  That is
why when your service to the country has fallen centuries into
arrears all you can think of is, to make of it an image and
stretch out your hands in expectation of gratuitous favours."

"We want to perform the impossible," I said.  "So our country
needs must be made into a god."

"You mean you have no heart for possible tasks," replied Nikhil.
"Whatever is already there is to be left undisturbed; yet there
must be a supernatural result:"

"Look here, Nikhil," I said at length, thoroughly exasperated.

"The things you have been saying are good enough as moral
lessons.  These ideas have served their purpose, as milk for
babes, at one stage of man's evolution, but will no longer do,
now that man has cut his teeth.

"Do we not see before our very eyes how things, of which we never
even dreamt of sowing the seed, are sprouting up on every side?
By what power?  That of the deity in our country who is becoming
manifest.  It is for the genius of the age to give that deity its
image.  Genius does not argue, it creates.  I only give form to
what the country imagines.

"I will spread it abroad that the goddess has vouchsafed me a
dream.  I will tell the Brahmins that they have been appointed
her priests, and that their downfall has been due to their
dereliction of duty in not seeing to the proper performance of
her worship.  Do you say I shall be uttering lies?  No, say I, it
is the truth--nay more, the truth which the country has so long
been waiting to learn from my lips.  If only I could get the
opportunity to deliver my message, you would see the stupendous
result."

"What I am afraid of," said Nikhil, "is, that my lifetime is
limited and the result you speak of is not the final result.  It
will have after-effects which may not be immediately apparent."

"I only seek the result," said I, "which belongs to today."

"The result I seek," answered Nikhil, "belongs to all time."

Nikhil may have had his share of Bengal's greatest gift--
imagination, but he has allowed it to be overshadowed and nearly
killed by an exotic conscientiousness.  Just look at the worship
of Durga which Bengal has carried to such heights.  That is one
of her greatest achievements.  I can swear that Durga is a
political goddess and was conceived as the image of the
__Shakti__ of patriotism in the days when Bengal was praying
to be delivered from Mussulman domination.  What other province
of India has succeeded in giving such wonderful visual expression
to the ideal of its quest?

Nothing betrayed Nikhil's loss of the divine gift of imagination
more conclusively than his reply to me.  "During the Mussulman
domination," he said, "the Maratha and the Sikh asked for fruit
from the arms which they themselves took up.  The Bengali
contented himself with placing weapons in the hands of his
goddess and muttering incantations to her; and as his country did
not really happen to be a goddess the only fruit he got was the
lopped-off heads of the goats and buffaloes of the sacrifice.
The day that we seek the good of the country along the path of
righteousness, He who is greater than our country will grant us
true fruition."

The unfortunate part of it is that Nikhil's words sound so fine
when put down on paper.  My words, however, are not meant to be
scribbled on paper, but to be scored into the heart of the
country.  The Pandit records his Treatise on Agriculture in
printer's ink; but the cultivator at the point of his plough
impresses his endeavour deep in the soil.

X



When I next saw Bimala I pitched my key high without further ado.
"Have we been able," I began, "to believe with all our heart in
the god for whose worship we have been born all these millions of
years, until he actually made himself visible to us?

"How often have I told you," I continued, "that had I not seen
you I never would have known all my country as One.  I know not
yet whether you rightly understand me.  The gods are invisible
only in their heaven--on earth they show themselves to mortal
men."

Bimala looked at me in a strange kind of way as she gravely
replied: "Indeed I understand you, Sandip."  This was the first
time she called me plain Sandip.

"Krishna," I continued, "whom Arjuna ordinarily knew only as the
driver of his chariot, had also His universal aspect, of which,
too, Arjuna had a vision one day, and that day he saw the Truth.
I have seen your Universal Aspect in my country.  The Ganges and
the Brahmaputra are the chains of gold that wind round and round
your neck; in the woodland fringes on the distant banks of the
dark waters of the river, I have seen your collyrium-darkened
eyelashes; the changeful sheen of your __sari__ moves for me
in the play of light and shade amongst the swaying shoots of
green corn; and the blazing summer heat, which makes the whole
sky lie gasping like a red-tongued lion in the desert, is nothing
but your cruel radiance.

"Since the goddess has vouchsafed her presence to her votary in
such wonderful guise, it is for me to proclaim her worship
throughout our land, and then shall the country gain new life.
'Your image make we in temple after temple.' [20] But this our
people have not yet fully realized.  So I would call on them in
your name and offer for their worship an image from which none
shall be able to withhold belief.  Oh give me this boon, this
power."

Bimala's eyelids drooped and she became rigid in her seat like a
figure of stone.  Had I continued she would have gone off into a
trance.  When I ceased speaking she opened wide her eyes, and
murmured with fixed gaze, as though still dazed: "O Traveller in
the path of Destruction!  Who is there that can stay your
progress?  Do I not see that none shall stand in the way of your
desires?  Kings shall lay their crowns at your feet; the wealthy
shall hasten to throw open their treasure for your acceptance;
those who have nothing else shall beg to be allowed to offer
their lives.  O my king, my god!  What you have seen in me I know
not, but I have seen the immensity of your grandeur in my heart.
Who am I, what am I, in its presence?  Ah, the awful power of
Devastation!  Never shall I truly live till it kills me utterly!
I can bear it no longer, my heart is breaking!"

Bimala slid down from her seat and fell at my feet, which she
clasped, and then she sobbed and sobbed and sobbed.

This is hypnotism indeed--the charm which can subdue the world!
No materials, no weapons--but just the delusion of irresistible
suggestion.  Who says "Truth shall Triumph"?  [21] Delusion
shall win in the end.  The Bengali understood this when he
conceived the image of the ten-handed goddess astride her lion,
and spread her worship in the land.  Bengal must now create a new
image to enchant and conquer the world.  __Bande Mataram__!

I gently lifted Bimala back into her chair, and lest reaction
should set in, I began again without losing time: "Queen!  The
Divine Mother has laid on me the duty of establishing her worship
in the land.  But, alas, I am poor!"

Bimala was still flushed, her eyes clouded, her accents thick, as
she replied: "You poor?  Is not all that each one has yours?
What are my caskets full of jewellery for?  Drag away from me all
my gold and gems for your worship.  I have no use for them!"

Once before Bimala had offered up her ornaments.  I am not
usually in the habit of drawing lines, but I felt I had to draw
the line there.  [22] I know why I feel this hesitation.  It is
for man to give ornaments to woman; to take them from her wounds
his manliness.

But I must forget myself.  Am I taking them?  They are for the
Divine Mother, to be poured in worship at her feet.  Oh, but it
must be a grand ceremony of worship such as the country has never
beheld before.  It must be a landmark in our history.  It shall
be my supreme legacy to the Nation.  Ignorant men worship gods.
I, Sandip, shall create them.

But all this is a far cry.  What about the urgent immediate?  At
least three thousand is indispensably necessary--five thousand
would do roundly and nicely.  But how on earth am I to mention
money after the high flight we have just taken?  And yet time is
precious!

I crushed all hesitation under foot as I jumped up and made my
plunge: "Queen!  Our purse is empty, our work about to stop!"

Bimala winced.  I could see she was thinking of that impossible
fifty thousand rupees.  What a load she must have been carrying
within her bosom, struggling under it, perhaps, through sleepless
nights!  What else had she with which to express her loving
worship?  Debarred from offering her heart at my feet, she
hankers to make this sum of money, so hopelessly large for her,
the bearer of her imprisoned feelings.  The thought of what she
must have gone through gives me a twinge of pain; for she is now
wholly mine.  The wrench of plucking up the plant by the roots is
over.  It is now only careful tending and nurture that is needed.

"Queen!"  said I, "that fifty thousand rupees is not particularly
wanted just now.  I calculate that, for the present, five
thousand or even three will serve."

The relief made her heart rebound.  "I shall fetch you five
thousand," she said in tones which seemed like an outburst of
song--the song which Radhika of the Vaishnava lyrics sang:

/*
  For my lover will I bind in my hair
  The flower which has no equal in the three worlds!
*/

--it is the same tune, the same song: five thousand will I bring!
That flower will I bind in my hair!

The narrow restraint of the flute brings out this quality of
song.  I must not allow the pressure of too much greed to flatten
out the reed, for then, as I fear, music will give place to the
questions "Why?"  "What is the use of so much?"  "How am I to get
it?"--not a word of which will rhyme with what Radhika sang!  So,
as I was saying, illusion alone is real--it is the flute itself;
while truth is but its empty hollow.  Nikhil has of late got a
taste of that pure emptiness--one can see it in his face, which
pains even me.  But it was Nikhil's boast that he wanted the
Truth, while mine was that I would never let go illusion from my
grasp.  Each has been suited to his taste, so why complain?

To keep Bimala's heart in the rarefied air of idealism, I cut
short all further discussion over the five thousand rupees.  I
reverted to the demon-destroying goddess and her worship.  When
was the ceremony to be held and where?  There is a great annual
fair at Ruimari, within Nikhil's estates, where hundreds of
thousands of pilgrims assemble.  That would be a grand place to
inaugurate the worship of our goddess!

Bimala waxed intensely enthusiastic.  This was not the burning of
foreign cloth or the people's granaries, so even Nikhil could
have no objection--so thought she.  But I smiled inwardly.  How
little these two persons, who have been together, day and night,
for nine whole years, know of each other!  They know something
perhaps of their home life, but when it comes to outside concerns
they are entirely at sea.  They had cherished the belief that the
harmony of the home with the outside was perfect.  Today they
realize to their cost that it is too late to repair their neglect
of years, and seek to harmonize them now.

What does it matter?  Let those who have made the mistake learn
their error by knocking against the world.  Why need I bother
about their plight?  For the present I find it wearisome to keep
Bimala soaring much longer, like a captive balloon, in regions
ethereal.  I had better get quite through with the matter in
hand.

When Bimala rose to depart and had neared the door I remarked in
my most casual manner: "So, about the money ..."

Bimala halted and faced back as she said: "On the expiry of the
month, when our personal allowances become due ..."

"That, I am afraid, would be much too late."

"When do you want it then?"

"Tomorrow.

"Tomorrow you shall have it."

------

20. A line from Bankim Chatterjee's national song __Bande
Mataram__.

21. A quotation from the Upanishads.

22. There is a world of sentiment attached to the ornaments worn
by women in Bengal.

They are not merely indicative of the love and regard of the
giver, but the wearing of them symbolizes all that is held best
in wifehood--the constant solicitude for her husband's welfare,
the successful performance of the material and spiritual duties
of the household entrusted to her care.  When the husband dies,
and the responsibility for the household changes hands, then are
all ornaments cast aside as a sign of the widow's renunciation of
worldly concerns.  At any other time the giving up of omaments is
always a sign of supreme distress and as such appeals acutely to
the sense of chivalry of any Bengali who may happen to witness it
[Trans.].



Chapter Eight

Nikhil's Story

X



PARAGRAPHS and letters against me have begun to come out in the
local papers; cartoons and lampoons are to follow, I am told.
Jets of wit and humour are being splashed about, and the lies
thus scattered are convulsing the whole country.  They know that
the monopoly of mud-throwing is theirs, and the innocent passer-
by cannot escape unsoiled.

They are saying that the residents in my estates, from the
highest to the lowest, are in favour of __Swadeshi__, but they
dare not declare themselves, for fear of me.  The few who have
been brave enough to defy me have felt the full rigour of my
persecution.  I am in secret league with the police, and in
private communication with the magistrate, and these frantic
efforts of mine to add a foreign title of my own earning to the
one I have inherited, will not, it is opined, go in vain.

On the other hand, the papers are full of praise for those
devoted sons of the motherland, the Kundu and the Chakravarti
__zamindars__.  If only, say they, the country had a few more
of such staunch patriots, the mills of Manchester would have, had
to sound their own dirge to the tune of __Bande Mataram__.

Then comes a letter in blood-red ink, giving a list of the
traitorous __zamindars__ whose treasuries have been burnt down
because of their failing to support the Cause.  Holy Fire, it
goes on to say, has been aroused to its sacred function of
purifying the country; and other agencies are also at work to see
that those who are not true sons of the motherland do cease to
encumber her lap.  The signature is an obvious __nom-de-
plume__.

I could see that this was the doing of our local students.  So I
sent for some of them and showed them the letter.

The B.A.  student gravely informed me that they also had heard
that a band of desperate patriots had been formed who would stick
at nothing in order to clear away all obstacles to the success of
__Swadeshi__.

"If," said I, "even one of our countrymen succumbs to these
overbearing desperadoes, that will indeed be a defeat for the
country!"

"We fail to follow you, Maharaja," said the history student.
"'Our country," I tried to explain, "has been brought to death's
door through sheer fear--from fear of the gods down to fear of
the police; and if you set up, in the name of freedom, the fear
of some other bogey, whatever it may be called; if you would
raise your victorious standard on the cowardice of the country by
means of downright oppression, then no true lover of the country
can bow to your decision."

"Is there any country, sir," pursued the history student, "where
submission to Government is not due to fear?"

"The freedom that exists in any country," I replied, "may be
measured by the extent of this reign of fear.  Where its threat
is confined to those who would hurt or plunder, there the
Government may claim to have freed man from the violence of man.
But if fear is to regulate how people are to dress, where they
shall trade, or what they must eat, then is man's freedom of will
utterly ignored, and manhood destroyed at the root."

"Is not such coercion of the individual will seen in other
countries too?"  continued the history student.

"Who denies it?"  I exclaimed.  "But in every country man has
destroyed himself to the extent that he has permitted slavery to
flourish."

"Does it not rather show," interposed a Master of Arts, "that
trading in slavery is inherent in man--a fundamental fact of his
nature?"

"Sandip Babu made the whole thing clear," said a graduate.  "He
gave us the example of Harish Kundu, your neighbouring
__zamindar__.  From his estates you cannot ferret out a single
ounce of foreign salt.  Why?  Because he has always ruled with an
iron hand.  In the case of those who are slaves by nature, the
lack of a strong master is the greatest of all calamities."

"Why, sir!"  chimed in an undergraduate, "have you not heard of
the obstreperous tenant of Chakravarti, the other __zamindar__
close by--how the law was set on him till he was reduced to utter
destitution?  When at last he was left with nothing to eat, he
started out to sell his wife's silver ornaments, but no one dared
buy them.  Then Chakravarti's manager offered him five rupees for
the lot.  They were worth over thirty, but he had to accept or
starve.  After taking over the bundle from him the manager coolly
said that those five rupees would be credited towards his rent!
We felt like having nothing more to do with Chakravarti or his
manager after that, but Sandip Babu told us that if we threw over
all the live people, we should have only dead bodies from the
burning-grounds to carry on the work with!  These live men, he
pointed out, know what they want and how to get it--they are born
rulers.  Those who do not know how to desire for themselves, must
live in accordance with, or die by virtue of, the desires of such
as these.  Sandip Babu contrasted them--Kundu and Chakravarti--
with you, Maharaja.  You, he said, for all your good intentions,
will never succeed in planting __Swadeshi__ within your
territory."

"It is my desire," I said, "to plant something greater than
__Swadeshi__.  I am not after dead logs but living trees--and
these will take time to grow."

"I am afraid, sir," sneered the history student, "that you will
get neither log nor tree.  Sandip Babu rightly teaches that in
order to get, you must snatch.  This is taking all of us some
time to learn, because it runs counter to what we were taught at
school.  I have seen with my own eyes that when a rent-collector
of Harish Kundu's found one of the tenants with nothing which
could be sold up to pay his rent, he was made to sell his young
wife!  Buyers were not wanting, and the __zamindar's__ demand
was satisfied.  I tell you, sir, the sight of that man's distress
prevented my getting sleep for nights together!  But, feel it as
I did, this much I realized, that the man who knows how to get
the money he is out for, even by selling up his debtor's wife, is
a better man than I am.  I confess it is beyond me--I am a
weakling, my eyes fill with tears.  If anybody can save our
country it is these Kundus and these Chakravartis and their
officials!"

I was shocked beyond words.  "If what you say be true," I cried,
"I clearly see that it must be the one endeavour of my life to
save the country from these same Kundus and Chakravartis and
officials.  The slavery that has entered into our very bones is
breaking out, at this opportunity, as ghastly tyranny.  You have
been so used to submit to domination through fear, you have come
to believe that to make others submit is a kind of religion.  My
fight shall be against this weakness, this atrocious cruelty!"
These things, which are so simple to ordinary folk, get so
twisted in the minds of our B.A.'s and M.A.'s, the only purpose
of whose historical quibbles seems to be to torture the truth!

XI



I am worried over Panchu's sham aunt.  It will be difficult to
disprove her, for though witnesses of a real event may be few or
even wanting, innumerable proofs of a thing that has not happened
can always be marshalled.  The object of this move is, evidently,
to get the sale of Panchu's holding to me set aside.  Being
unable to find any other way out of it, I was thinking of
allowing Panchu to hold a permanent tenure in my estates and
building him a cottage on it.  But my master would not have it.
I should not give in to these nefarious tactics so easily, he
objected, and offered to attend to the matter himself.

"You, sir!"  I cried, considerably surprised.

"Yes, I," he repeated.

I could not see, at all clearly, what my master could do to
counteract these legal machinations.  That evening, at the time
he usually came to me, he did not turn up.  On my making
inquiries, his servant said he had left home with a few things
packed in a small trunk, and some bedding, saying he would be
back in a few days.  I thought he might have sallied forth to
hunt for witnesses in Panchu's uncle's village.  In that case,
however, I was sure that his would be a hopeless quest ...

During the day I forget myself in my work.  As the late autumn
afternoon wears on, the colours of the sky become turbid, and so
do the feelings of my mind.  There are many in this world whose
minds dwell in brick-built houses--they can afford to ignore the
thing called the outside.  But my mind lives under the trees in
the open, directly receives upon itself the messages borne by the
free winds, and responds from the bottom of its heart to all the
musical cadences of light and darkness.

While the day is bright and the world in the pursuit of its
numberless tasks crowds around, then it seems as if my life wants
nothing else.  But when the colours of the sky fade away and the
blinds are drawn down over the windows of heaven, then my heart
tells me that evening falls just for the purpose of shutting out
the world, to mark the time when the darkness must be filled with
the One.  This is the end to which earth, sky, and waters
conspire, and I cannot harden myself against accepting its
meaning.  So when the gloaming deepens over the world, like the
gaze of the dark eyes of the beloved, then my whole being tells
me that work alone cannot be the truth of life, that work is not
the be-all and the end-all of man, for man is not simply a serf--
even though the serfdom be of the True and the Good.

Alas, Nikhil, have you for ever parted company with that self of
yours who used to be set free under the starlight, to plunge into
the infinite depths of the night's darkness after the day's work
was done?  How terribly alone is he, who misses companionship in
the midst of the multitudinousness of life.

The other day, when the afternoon had reached the meeting-point
of day and night, I had no work, nor the mind for work, nor was
my master there to keep me company.  With my empty, drifting
heart longing to anchor on to something, I traced my steps
towards the inner gardens.  I was very fond of chrysanthemums and
had rows of them, of all varieties, banked up in pots against one
of the garden walls.  When they were in flower, it looked like a
wave of green breaking into iridescent foam.  It was some time
since I had been to this part of the grounds, and I was beguiled
into a cheerful expectancy at the thought of meeting my
chrysanthemums after our long separation.

As I went in, the full moon had just peeped over the wall, her
slanting rays leaving its foot in deep shadow.  It seemed as if
she had come a-tiptoe from behind, and clasped the darkness over
the eyes, smiling mischievously.  When I came near the bank of
chrysanthemums, I saw a figure stretched on the grass in front.
My heart gave a sudden thud.  The figure also sat up with a start
at my footsteps.

What was to be done next?  I was wondering whether it would do to
beat a precipitate retreat.  Bimala, also, was doubtless casting
about for some way of escape.  But it was as awkward to go as to
stay!  Before I could make up my mind, Bimala rose, pulled the
end of her __sari__ over her head, and walked off towards the
inner apartments.

This brief pause had been enough to make real to me the cruel
load of Bimala's misery.  The plaint of my own life vanished from
me in a moment.  I called out: "Bimala!"

She started and stayed her steps, but did not turn back.  I went
round and stood before her.  Her face was in the shade, the
moonlight fell on mine.  Her eyes were downcast, her hands
clenched.

"Bimala," said I, "why should I seek to keep you fast in this
closed cage of mine?  Do I not know that thus you cannot but pine
and droop?"

She stood still, without raising her eyes or uttering a word.

"I know," I continued, "that if I insist on keeping you shackled
my whole life will be reduced to nothing but an iron chain.  What
pleasure can that be to me?"

She was still silent.

"So," I concluded, "I tell you, truly, Bimala, you are free.
Whatever I may or may not have been to you, I refuse to be your
fetters."  With which I came away towards the outer apartments.

No, no, it was not a generous impulse, nor indifference.  I had
simply come to understand that never would I be free until I
could set free.  To try to keep Bimala as a garland round my
neck, would have meant keeping a weight hanging over my heart.
Have I not been praying with all my strength, that if happiness
may not be mine, let it go; if grief needs must be my lot, let it
come; but let me not be kept in bondage.  To clutch hold of that
which is untrue as though it were true, is only to throttle
oneself.  May I be saved from such self-destruction.

When I entered my room, I found my master waiting there.  My
agitated feelings were still heaving within me.  "Freedom, sir,"
I began unceremoniously, without greeting or inquiry, "freedom is
the biggest thing for man.  Nothing can be compared to it--
nothing at all!"

Surprised at my outburst, my master looked up at me in silence.

"One can understand nothing from books," I went on.  "We read in
the scriptures that our desires are bonds, fettering us as well
as others.  But such words, by themselves, are so empty.  It is
only when we get to the point of letting the bird out of its cage
that we can realize how free the bird has set us.  Whatever we
cage, shackles us with desire whose bonds are stronger than those
of iron chains.  I tell you, sir, this is just what the world has
failed to understand.  They all seek to reform something outside
themselves.  But reform is wanted only in one's own desires,
nowhere else, nowhere else!"

"We think," he said, "that we are our own masters when we get in
our hands the object of our desire--but we are really our own
masters only when we are able to cast out our desires from our
minds."

"When we put all this into words, sir," I went on, "it sounds
like some bald-headed injunction, but when we realize even a
little of it we find it to be __amrita__--which the gods have
drunk and become immortal.  We cannot see Beauty till we let go
our hold of it.  It was Buddha who conquered the world, not
Alexander--this is untrue when stated in dry prose--oh when shall
we be able to sing it?  When shall all these most intimate truths
of the universe overflow the pages of printed books and leap out
in a sacred stream like the Ganges from the Gangotrie?"

I was suddenly reminded of my master's absence during the last
few days and of my ignorance as to its reason.  I felt somewhat
foolish as I asked him: "And where have you been all this while,
sir?"

"Staying with Panchu," he replied.

"Indeed!"  I exclaimed.  "Have you been there all these days?"

"Yes.  I wanted to come to an understanding with the woman who
calls herself his aunt.  She could hardly be induced to believe
that there could be such an odd character among the gentlefolk as
the one who sought their hospitality.  When she found I really
meant to stay on, she began to feel rather ashamed of herself.
'Mother,' said I, 'you are not going to get rid of me, even if
you abuse me!  And so long as I stay, Panchu stays also.  For you
see, do you not, that I cannot stand by and see his motherless
little ones sent out into the streets?'

"She listened to my talks in this strain for a couple of days
without saying yes or no.  This morning I found her tying up her
bundles.  'We are going back to Brindaban,' she said.  'Let us
have our expenses for the journey.' I knew she was not going to
Brindaban, and also that the cost of her journey would be
substantial.  So I have come to you."

"The required cost shall be paid," I said.

"The old woman is not a bad sort," my master went on musingly.
"Panchu was not sure of her caste, and would not let her touch
the water-jar, or anything at all of his.  So they were
continually bickering.  When she found I had no objection to her
touch, she looked after me devotedly.  She is a splendid cook!

"But all remnants of Panchu's respect for me vanished!  To the
last he had thought that I was at least a simple sort of person.
But here was I, risking my caste without a qualm to win over the
old woman for my purpose.  Had I tried to steal a march on her by
tutoring a witness for the trial, that would have been a
different matter.  Tactics must be met by tactics.  But stratagem
at the expense of orthodoxy is more than he can tolerate!

"Anyhow, I must stay on a few days at Panchu's even after the
woman leaves, for Harish Kundu may be up to any kind of devilry.
He has been telling his satellites that he was content to have
furnished Panchu with an aunt, but I have gone the length of
supplying him with a father.  He would like to see, now, how many
fathers of his can save him!"

"We may or may not be able to save him," I said; "but if we
should perish in the attempt to save the country from the
thousand-and-one snares--of religion, custom and selfishness--
which these people are busy spreading, we shall at least die
happy."



Bimala's Story

XIV



Who could have thought that so much would happen in this one
life?  I feel as if I have passed through a whole series of
births, time has been flying so fast, I did not feel it move at
all, till the shock came the other day.

I knew there would be words between us when I made up my mind to
ask my husband to banish foreign goods from our market.  But it
was my firm belief that I had no need to meet argument by
argument, for there was magic in the very air about me.  Had not
so tremendous a man as Sandip fallen helplessly at my feet, like
a wave of the mighty sea breaking on the shore?  Had I called
him?  No, it was the summons of that magic spell of mine.  And
Amulya, poor dear boy, when he first came to me--how the current
of his life flushed with colour, like the river at dawn!  Truly
have I realized how a goddess feels when she looks upon the
radiant face of her devotee.

With the confidence begotten of these proofs of my power, I was
ready to meet my husband like a lightning-charged cloud.  But
what was it that happened?  Never in all these nine years have I
seen such a far-away, distraught look in his eyes--like the
desert sky--with no merciful moisture of its own, no colour
reflected, even, from what it looked upon.  I should have been so
relieved if his anger had flashed out!  But I could find nothing
in him which I could touch.  I felt as unreal as a dream--a dream
which would leave only the blackness of night when it was over.

In the old days I used to be jealous of my sister-in-law for her
beauty.  Then I used to feel that Providence had given me no
power of my own, that my whole strength lay in the love which my
husband had bestowed on me.  Now that I had drained to the dregs
the cup of power and could not do without its intoxication, I
suddenly found it dashed to pieces at my feet, leaving me nothing
to live for.

How feverishly I had sat to do my hair that day.  Oh, shame,
shame on me, the utter shame of it!  My sister-in-law, when
passing by, had exclaimed: "Aha, Chota Rani!  Your hair seems
ready to jump off.  Don't let it carry your head with it."

And then, the other day in the garden, how easy my husband found
it to tell me that he set me free!  But can freedom--empty
freedom--be given and taken so easily as all that?  It is like
setting a fish free in the sky--for how can I move or live
outside the atmosphere of loving care which has always sustained
me?

When I came to my room today, I saw only furniture--only the
bedstead, only the looking-glass, only the clothes-rack--not the
all-pervading heart which used to be there, over all.  Instead of
it there was freedom, only freedom, mere emptiness!  A dried-up
watercourse with all its rocks and pebbles laid bare.  No
feeling, only furniture!

When I had arrived at a state of utter bewilderment, wondering
whether anything true was left in my life, and whereabouts it
could be, I happened to meet Sandip again.  Then life struck
against life, and the sparks flew in the same old way.  Here was
truth--impetuous truth--which rushed in and overflowed all
bounds, truth which was a thousand times truer than the Bara Rani
with her maid, Thako and her silly songs, and all the rest of
them who talked and laughed and wandered about ...

"Fifty thousand!"  Sandip had demanded.

"What is fifty thousand?"  cried my intoxicated heart.  "You
shall have it!"

How to get it, where to get it, were minor points not worth
troubling over.  Look at me.  Had I not risen, all in one moment,
from my nothingness to a height above everything?  So shall all
things come at my beck and call.  I shall get it, get it, get it
--there cannot be any doubt.

Thus had I come away from Sandip the other day.  Then as I looked
about me, where was it--the tree of plenty?  Oh, why does this
outer world insult the heart so?

And yet get it I must; how, I do not care; for sin there cannot
be.  Sin taints only the weak; I with my __Shakti__ am beyond
its reach.  Only a commoner can be a thief, the king conquers and
takes his rightful spoil ...  I must find out where the treasury
is; who takes the money in; who guards it.

I spent half the night standing in the outer verandah peering at
the row of office buildings.  But how to get that fifty thousand
rupees out of the clutches of those iron bars?  If by some
__mantram__ I could have made all those guards fall dead in
their places, I would not have hesitated--so pitiless did I feel!

But while a whole gang of robbers seemed dancing a war-dance
within the whirling brain of its Rani, the great house of the
Rajas slept in peace.  The gong of the watch sounded hour after
hour, and the sky overhead placidly looked on.

At last I sent for Amulya.

"Money is wanted for the Cause," I told him.  "Can you not get it
out of the treasury?"

"Why not?"  said he, with his chest thrown out.

Alas!  had I not said "Why not?"  to Sandip just in the same way?
The poor lad's confidence could rouse no hopes in my mind.

"How will you do it?"  I asked.

The wild plans he began to unfold would hardly bear repetition
outside the pages of a penny dreadful.

"No, Amulya," I said severely, "you must not be childish."

"Very well, then," he said, "let me bribe those watchmen."

"Where is the money to come from?"

"I can loot the bazar," he burst out, without blenching.

"Leave all that alone.  I have my ornaments, they will serve.

"But," said Amulya, "it strikes me that the cashier cannot be
bribed.  Never mind, there is another and simpler way."

"What is that?"

"Why need you hear it?  It is quite simple."

"Still, I should like to know."

Amulya fumbled in the pocket of his tunic and pulled out, first a
small edition of the __Gita__, which he placed on the table--
and then a little pistol, which he showed me, but said nothing
further.

Horror!  It did not take him a moment to make up his mind to kill
our good old cashier!  [23] To look at his frank, open face one
would not have thought him capable of hurting a fly, but how
different were the words which came from his mouth.  It was clear
that the cashier's place in the world meant nothing real to him;
it was a mere vacancy, lifeless, feelingless, with only stock
phrases from the __Gita--Who kills the body kills naught! __

"Whatever do you mean, Amulya?"  I exclaimed at length.  "Don't
you know that the dear old man has got a wife and children and
that he is ..."

"Where are we to find men who have no wives and children?"  he
interrupted.  "Look here, Maharani, the thing we call pity is, at
bottom, only pity for ourselves.  We cannot bear to wound our own
tender instincts, and so we do not strike at all--pity indeed!
The height of cowardice!"

To hear Sandip's phrases in the mouth of this mere boy staggered
me.  So delightfully, lovably immature was he--of that age when
the good may still be believed in as good, of that age when one
really lives and grows.  The Mother in me awoke.

For myself there was no longer good or bad--only death, beautiful
alluring death.  But to hear this stripling calmly talk of
murdering an inoffensive old man as the right thing to do, made
me shudder all over.  The more clearly I saw that there was no
sin in his heart, the more horrible appeared to me the sin of his
words.  I seemed to see the sin of the parents visited on the
innocent child.

The sight of his great big eyes shining with faith and enthusiasm
touched me to the quick.  He was going, in his fascination,
straight to the jaws of the python, from which, once in, there
was no return.  How was he to be saved?  Why does not my country
become, for once, a real Mother--clasp him to her bosom and cry
out: "Oh, my child, my child, what profits it that you should
save me, if so it be that I should fail to save you?"

I know, I know, that all Power on earth waxes great under compact
with Satan.  But the Mother is there, alone though she be, to
contemn and stand against this devil's progress.  The Mother
cares not for mere success, however great--she wants to give
life, to save life.  My very soul, today, stretches out its hands
in yearning to save this child.

A while ago I suggested robbery to him.  Whatever I may now say
against it will be put down to a woman's weakness.  They only
love our weakness when it drags the world in its toils!

"You need do nothing at all, Amulya, I will see to the money," I
told him finally.  When he had almost reached the door, I called
him back.

"Amulya," said I, "I am your elder sister.  Today is not the
Brothers' Day [24] according to the calendar, but all the days in
the year are really Brothers' Days.  My blessing be with you: may
God keep you always."

These unexpected words from my lips took Amulya by surprise.  He
stood stock-still for a time.  Then, coming to himself, he
prostrated himself at my feet in acceptance of the relationship
and did me reverence.  When he rose his eyes were full of tears
...  O little brother mine!  I am fast going to my death--let me
take all your sin away with me.  May no taint from me ever
tarnish your innocence!

I said to him: "Let your offering of reverence be that pistol!"

"What do you want with it, sister?"

"I will practise death."

"Right, sister.  Our women, also, must know how to die, to deal
death!"  with which Amulya handed me the pistol.  The radiance of
his youthful countenance seemed to tinge my life with the touch
of a new dawn.  I put away the pistol within my clothes.  May
this reverence-offering be the last resource in my extremity ...

The door to the mother's chamber in my woman's heart once opened,
I thought it would always remain open.  But this pathway to the
supreme good was closed when the mistress took the place of the
mother and locked it again.  The very next day I saw Sandip; and
madness, naked and rampant, danced upon my heart.

What was this?  Was this, then, my truer self?  Never!  I had
never before known this shameless, this cruel one within me.  The
snake-charmer had come, pretending to draw this snake from within
the fold of my garment--but it was never there, it was his all
the time.  Some demon has gained possession of me, and what I am
doing today is the play of his activity--it has nothing to do
with me.

This demon, in the guise of a god, had come with his ruddy torch
to call me that day, saying: "I am your Country.  I am your
Sandip.  I am more to you than anything else of yours.  __Bande
Mataram__!"  And with folded hands I had responded: "You are my
religion.  You are my heaven.  Whatever else is mine shall be
swept away before my love for you.  __Bande Mataram__!"

Five thousand is it?  Five thousand it shall be!  You want it
tomorrow?  Tomorrow you shall have it!  In this desperate orgy,
that gift of five thousand shall be as the foam of wine--and then
for the riotous revel!  The immovable world shall sway under our
feet, fire shall flash from our eyes, a storm shall roar in our
ears, what is or is not in front shall become equally dim.  And
then with tottering footsteps we shall plunge to our death--in a
moment all fire will be extinguished, the ashes will be
scattered, and nothing will remain behind.

------

23. The cashier is the official who is most in touch with the
ladies of a __zamindar's__ household, directly taking their
requisitions for household stores and doing their shopping for
them, and so he becomes more a member of the family than the
others.  [Trans.].

24. The daughter of the house occupies a place of specially
tender affection in a Bengali household (perhaps in Hindu
households all over India) because, by dictate of custom, she
must be given away in marriage so early.  She thus takes
corresponding memories with her to her husband's home, where she
has to begin as a stranger before she can get into her place.
The resulting feeling, of the mistress of her new home for the
one she has left, has taken ceremonial form as the Brothers' Day,
on which the brothers are invited to the married sisters' houses.
Where the sister is the elder, she offers her blessing and
receives the brother's reverence, and vice versa.  Presents,
called the offerings of reverence (or blessing), are exchanged.
[Trans.].



Chapter Nine

Bimala's Story

XV



FOR a time I was utterly at a loss to think of any way of getting
that money.  Then, the other day, in the light of intense
excitement, suddenly the whole picture stood out clear before me.

Every year my husband makes a reverence-offering of six thousand
rupees to my sister-in-law at the time of the Durga Puja.  Every
year it is deposited in her account at the bank in Calcutta.
This year the offering was made as usual, but it has not yet been
sent to the bank, being kept meanwhile in an iron safe, in a
corner of the little dressing-room attached to our bedroom.

Every year my husband takes the money to the bank himself.  This
year he has not yet had an opportunity of going to town.  How
could I fail to see the hand of Providence in this?  The money
has been held up because the country wants it--who could have the
power to take it away from her to the bank?  And how can I have
the power to refuse to take the money?  The goddess revelling in
destruction holds out her blood-cup crying: "Give me drink.  I am
thirsty."  I will give her my own heart's blood with that five
thousand rupees.  Mother, the loser of that money will scarcely
feel the loss, but me you will utterly ruin!

Many a time, in the old days, have I inwardly called the Senior
Rani a thief, for I charged her with wheedling money out of my
trusting husband.  After her husband's death, she often used to
make away with things belonging to the estate for her own use.
This I used to point out to my husband, but he remained silent.
I would get angry and say: "If you feel generous, make gifts by
all means, but why allow yourself to be robbed?"  Providence must
have smiled, then, at these complaints of mine, for tonight I am
on the way to rob my husband's safe of my sister-in-law's money.
My husband's custom was to let his keys remain in his pockets
when he took off his clothes for the night, leaving them in the
dressing-room.  I picked out the key of the safe and opened it.
The slight sound it made seemed to wake the whole world!  A
sudden chill turned my hands and feet icy cold, and I shivered
all over.

There was a drawer inside the safe.  On opening this I found the
money, not in currency notes, but in gold rolled up in paper.  I
had no time to count out what I wanted.  There were twenty rolls,
all of which I took and tied up in a corner of my __sari__.

What a weight it was.  The burden of the theft crushed my heart
to the dust.  Perhaps notes would have made it seem less like
thieving, but this was all gold.

After I had stolen into my room like a thief, it felt like my own
room no longer.  All the most precious rights which I had over it
vanished at the touch of my theft.  I began to mutter to myself,
as though telling __mantrams: Bande Mataram, Bande Mataram__,
my Country, my golden Country, all this gold is for you, for none
else!

But in the night the mind is weak.  I came back into the bedroom
where my husband was asleep, closing my eyes as I passed through,
and went off to the open terrace beyond, on which I lay prone,
clasping to my breast the end of the __sari__ tied over the
gold.  And each one of the rolls gave me a shock of pain.

The silent night stood there with forefinger upraised.  I could
not think of my house as separate from my country: I had robbed
my house, I had robbed my country.  For this sin my house had
ceased to be mine, my country also was estranged from me.  Had I
died begging for my country, even unsuccessfully, that would have
been worship, acceptable to the gods.  But theft is never
worship--how then can I offer this gold?  Ah me!  I am doomed to
death myself, must I desecrate my country with my impious touch?
The way to put the money back is closed to me.  I have not
the strength to return to the room, take again that key, open
once more that safe--I should swoon on the threshold of my
husband's door.  The only road left now is the road in front.
Neither have I the strength deliberately to sit down and count
the coins.  Let them remain behind their coverings: I cannot
calculate.

There was no mist in the winter sky.  The stars were shining
brightly.  If, thought I to myself, as I lay out there, I had to
steal these stars one by one, like golden coins, for my country--
these stars so carefully stored up in the bosom of the darkness--
then the sky would be blinded, the night widowed for ever, and my
theft would rob the whole world.  But was not also this very
thing I had done a robbing of the whole world--not only of money,
but of trust, of righteousness?

I spent the night lying on the terrace.  When at last it was
morning, and I was sure that my husband had risen and left the
room, then only with my shawl pulled over my head, could I
retrace my steps towards the bedroom.

My sister-in-law was about, with her brass pot, watering her
plants.  When she saw me passing in the distance she cried: "Have
you heard the news, Chota Rani?"

I stopped in silence, all in a tremor.  It seemed to me that the
rolls of sovereigns were bulging through the shawl.  I feared
they would burst and scatter in a ringing shower, exposing to all
the servants of the house the thief who had made herself
destitute by robbing her own wealth.

"Your band of robbers," she went on, "have sent an anonymous
message threatening to loot the treasury."

I remained as silent as a thief.

"I was advising Brother Nikhil to seek your protection," she
continued banteringly.  "Call off your minions, Robber Queen!  We
will offer sacrifices to your __Bande Mataram__ if you will
but save us.  What doings there are these days!--but for the
Lord's sake, spare our house at least from burglary."

I hastened into my room without reply.  I had put my foot on
quicksand, and could not now withdraw it.  Struggling would only
send me down deeper.

If only the time would arrive when I could hand over the money to
Sandip!  I could bear it no longer, its weight was breaking
through my very ribs.

It was still early when I got word that Sandip was awaiting me.
Today I had no thought of adornment.  Wrapped as I was in my
shawl, I went off to the outer apartments.  As I entered the
sitting-room I saw Sandip and Amulya there, together.  All my
dignity, all my honour, seemed to run tingling through my body
from head to foot and vanish into the ground.  I should have to
lay bare a woman's uttermost shame in sight of this boy!  Could
they have been discussing my deed in their meeting place?  Had
any vestige of a veil of decency been left for me?

We women shall never understand men.  When they are bent on
making a road for some achievement, they think nothing of
breaking the heart of the world into pieces to pave it for the
progress of their chariot.  When they are mad with the
intoxication of creating, they rejoice in destroying the creation
of the Creator.  This heart-breaking shame of mine will not
attract even a glance from their eyes.  They have no feeling for
life itself--all their eagerness is for their object.  What am I
to them but a meadow flower in the path of a torrent in flood?

What good will this extinction of me be to Sandip?  Only five
thousand rupees?  Was not I good for something more than only
five thousand rupees?  Yes, indeed!  Did I not learn that from
Sandip himself, and was I not able in the light of this knowledge
to despise all else in my world?  I was the giver of light, of
life, of __Shakti__, of immortality--in that belief, in that
joy, I had burst all my bounds and come into the open.  Had
anyone then fulfilled for me that joy, I should have lived in my
death.  I should have lost nothing in the loss of my all.
Do they want to tell me now that all this was false?  The psalm
of my praise which was sung so devotedly, did it bring me down
from my heaven, not to make heaven of earth, but only to level
heaven itself with the dust?



XVI


"The money, Queen?"  said Sandip with his keen glance full on my
face.

Amulya also fixed his gaze on me.  Though not my own mother's
child, yet the dear lad is brother to me; for mother is mother
all the world over.  With his guileless face, his gentle eyes,
his innocent youth, he looked at me.  And I, a woman--of his
mother's sex--how could I hand him poison, just because he asked
for it?

"The money, Queen!"  Sandip's insolent demand rang in my ears.
For very shame and vexation I felt I wanted to fling that gold at
Sandip's head.  I could hardly undo the knot of my __sari__,
my fingers trembled so.  At last the paper rolls dropped on the
table.

Sandip's face grew black ...  He must have thought that the rolls
were of silver ...  What contempt was in his looks.  What utter
disgust at incapacity.  It was almost as if he could have struck
me!  He must have suspected that I had come to parley with him,
to offer to compound his claim for five thousand rupees with a
few hundreds.  There was a moment when I thought he would snatch
up the rolls and throw them out of the window, declaring that he
was no beggar, but a king claiming tribute.

"Is that all?"  asked Amulya with such pity welling up in his
voice that I wanted to sob out aloud.  I kept my heart tightly
pressed down, and merely nodded my head.  Sandip was speechless.
He neither touched the rolls, nor uttered a sound.

My humiliation went straight to the boy's heart.  With a sudden,
feigned enthusiasm he exclaimed: "It's plenty.  It will do
splendidly.  You have saved us."  With which he tore open the
covering of one of the rolls.

The sovereigns shone out.  And in a moment the black covering
seemed to be lifted from Sandip's countenance also.  His delight
beamed forth from his features.  Unable to control his sudden
revulsion of feeling, he sprang up from his seat towards me.
What he intended I know not.  I flashed a lightning glance
towards Amulya--the colour had left the boy's face as at the
stroke of a whip.  Then with all my strength I thrust Sandip from
me.  As he reeled back his head struck the edge of the marble
table and he dropped on the floor.  There he lay awhile,
motionless.  Exhausted with my effort, I sank back on my seat.

Amulya's face lightened with a joyful radiance.  He did not even
turn towards Sandip, but came straight up, took the dust of my
feet, and then remained there, sitting on the floor in front of
me.  O my little brother, my child!  This reverence of yours is
the last touch of heaven left in my empty world!  I could contain
myself no longer, and my tears flowed fast.  I covered my eyes
with the end of my __sari__, which I pressed to my face with
both my hands, and sobbed and sobbed.  And every time that I felt
on my feet his tender touch trying to comfort me my tears broke
out afresh.

After a little, when I had recovered myself and taken my hands
from my face, I saw Sandip back at the table, gathering up the
sovereigns in his handkerchief, as if nothing had happened.
Amulya rose to his seat, from his place near my feet, his wet
eyes shining.


Sandip coolly looked up at my face as he remarked: "It is six
thousand."

"What do we want with so much, Sandip Babu?"  cried Amulya.
"Three thousand five hundred is all we need for our work."

"Our wants are not for this one place only," Sandip replied.  "We
shall want all we can get."

"That may be," said Amulya.  "But in future I undertake to get
you all you want.  Out of this, Sandip Babu, please return the
extra two thousand five hundred to the Maharani."

Sandip glanced enquiringly at me.

"No, no," I exclaimed.  "I shall never touch that money again.
Do with it as you will."

"Can man ever give as woman can?"  said Sandip, looking towards
Amulya.

"They are goddesses!"  agreed Amulya with enthusiasm.

"We men can at best give of our power," continued Sandip.  "But
women give themselves.  Out of their own life they give birth,
out of their own life they give sustenance.  Such gifts are the
only true gifts."  Then turning to me, "Queen!"  said he, "if
what you have given us had been only money I would not have
touched it.  But you have given that which is more to you than
life itself!"

There must be two different persons inside men.  One of these in
me can understand that Sandip is trying to delude me; the other
is content to be deluded.  Sandip has power, but no strength of
righteousness.  The weapon of his which rouses up life smites it
again to death.  He has the unfailing quiver of the gods, but the
shafts in them are of the demons.

Sandip's handkerchief was not large enough to hold all the coins.
"Queen," he asked, "can you give me another?"  When I gave him
mine, he reverently touched his forehead with it, and then
suddenly kneeling on the floor he made me an obeisance.
"Goddess!"  he said, "it was to offer my reverence that I had
approached you, but you repulsed me, and rolled me in the dust.
Be it so, I accept your repulse as your boon to me, I raise it to
my head in salutation!"  with which he pointed to the place where
he had been hurt.

Had I then misunderstood him?  Could it be that his outstretched
hands had really been directed towards my feet?  Yet, surely,
even Amulya had seen the passion that flamed out of his eyes, his
face.  But Sandip is such an adept in setting music to his chant
of praise that I cannot argue; I lose my power of seeing truth;
my sight is clouded over like an opium-eater's eyes.  And so,
after all, he gave me back twice as much in return for the blow I
had dealt him--the wound on his head ended by making me bleed at
heart.  When I had received Sandip's obeisance my theft seemed to
gain a dignity, and the gold glittering on the table to smile
away all fear of disgrace, all stings of conscience.

Like me Amulya also was won back.  His devotion to Sandip, which
had suffered a momentary check, blazed up anew.  The flower-vase
of his mind filled once more with offerings for the worship of
Sandip and me.  His simple faith shone out of his eyes with the
pure light of the morning star at dawn.

After I had offered worship and received worship my sin became
radiant.  And as Amulya looked on my face he raised his folded
hands in salutation and cried __Bande Mataram__!  I cannot
expect to have this adoration surrounding me for ever; and yet
this has come to be the only means of keeping alive my self-
respect.

I can no longer enter my bedroom.  The bedstead seems to thrust
out a forbidding hand, the iron safe frowns at me.  I want to get
away from this continual insult to myself which is rankling
within me.  I want to keep running to Sandip to hear him sing my
praises.  There is just this one little altar of worship which
has kept its head above the all-pervading depths of my dishonour,
and so I want to cleave to it night and day; for on whichever
side I step away from it, there is only emptiness.

Praise, praise, I want unceasing praise.  I cannot live if my
wine-cup be left empty for a single moment.  So, as the very
price of my life, I want Sandip of all the world, today.

XVII



When my husband nowadays comes in for his meals I feel I cannot
sit before him; and yet it is such a shame not to be near him
that I feel I cannot do that either.  So I seat myself where we
cannot look at each other's face.  That was how I was sitting the
other day when the Bara Rani came and joined us.

"It is all very well for you, brother," said she, "to laugh away
these threatening letters.  But they do frighten me so.  Have you
sent off that money you gave me to the Calcutta bank?"

"No, I have not yet had the time to get it away," my husband
replied.

"You are so careless, brother dear, you had better look out..."

"But it is in the iron safe right inside the inner dressing-
room," said my husband with a reassuring smile.

"What if they get in there?  You can never tell!"

"If they go so far, they might as well carry you off too!"

"Don't you fear, no one will come for poor me.  The real
attraction is in your room!  But joking apart, don't run the risk
of keeping money in the room like that."

"They will be taking along the Government revenue to Calcutta in
a few days now; I will send this money to the bank under the same
escort."

"Very well.  But see you don't forget all about it, you are so
absent-minded."

"Even if that money gets lost, while in my room, the loss cannot
be yours, Sister Rani."

"Now, now, brother, you will make me very angry if you talk in
that way.  Was I making any difference between yours and mine?
What if your money is lost, does not that hurt me?  If Providence
has thought fit to take away my all, it has not left me
insensible to the value of the most devoted brother known since
the days of Lakshman."  [25]

"Well, Junior Rani, are you turned into a wooden doll?  You have
not spoken a word yet.  Do you know, brother, our Junior Rani
thinks I try to flatter you.  If things came to that pass I
should not hesitate to do so, but I know my dear old brother does
not need it!"

Thus the Senior Rani chattered on, not forgetting now and then to
draw her brother's attention to this or that special delicacy
amongst the dishes that were being served.  My head was all the
time in a whirl.  The crisis was fast coming.  Something must be
done about replacing that money.  And as I kept asking myself
what could be done, and how it was to be done, the unceasing
patter of my sister-in-law's words seemed more and more
intolerable.

What made it all the worse was, that nothing could escape my
sister-in-law's keen eyes.  Every now and then she was casting
side glances towards me.  What she could read in my face I do not
know, but to me it seemed that everything was written there only
too plainly.

Then I did an infinitely rash thing.  Affecting an easy, amused
laugh I said: "All the Senior Rani's suspicions, I see, are
reserved for me--her fears of thieves and robbers are only a
feint."

The Senior Rani smiled mischievously.  "You are right, sister
mine.  A woman's theft is the most fatal of all thefts.  But how
can you elude my watchfulness?  Am I a man, that you should
hoodwink me?"

"If you fear me so," I retorted, "let me keep in your hands all I
have, as security.  If I cause you loss, you can then repay
yourself."

"Just listen to her, our simple little Junior Rani!"  she laughed
back, turning to my husband.  "Does she not know that there are
losses which no security can make good, either in this world or
in the next?"

My husband did not join in our exchange of words.  When he had
finished, he went off to the outer apartments, for nowadays he
does not take his mid-day rest in our room.

All my more valuable jewels were in deposit in the treasury in
charge of the cashier.  Still what I kept with me must have been
worth thirty or forty thousand.  I took my jewel-box to the Bara
Rani's room and opened it out before her, saying: "I leave these
with you, sister.  They will keep you quite safe from all worry."

The Bara Rani made a gesture of mock despair.  "You positively
astound me, Chota Rani!"  she said.  "Do you really suppose I
spend sleepless nights for fear of being robbed by you?"

"What harm if you did have a wholesome fear of me?  Does anybody
know anybody else in this world?"

"You want to teach me a lesson by trusting me?  No, no!  I am
bothered enough to know what to do with my own jewels, without
keeping watch over yours.  Take them away, there's a dear, so
many prying servants are about."

I went straight from my sister-in-law's room to the sitting-room
outside, and sent for Amulya.  With him Sandip came along too.  I
was in a great hurry, and said to Sandip: "If you don't mind, I
want to have a word or two with Amulya.  Would you..."

Sandip smiled a wry smile.  "So Amulya and I are separate in your
eyes?  If you have set about to wean him from me, I must confess
I have no power to retain him."

I made no reply, but stood waiting.

"Be it so," Sandip went on.  "Finish your special talk with
Amulya.  But then you must give me a special talk all to myself
too, or it will mean a defeat for me.  I can stand everything,
but not defeat.  My share must always be the lion's share.  This
has been my constant quarrel with Providence.  I will defeat the
Dispenser of my fate, but not take defeat at his hands."  With a
crushing look at Amulya, Sandip walked out of the room.

"Amulya, my own little brother, you must do one thing for me," I
said.

"I will stake my life for whatever duty you may lay on me,
sister."

I brought out my jewel-box from the folds of my shawl and placed
it before him.  "Sell or pawn these," I said, "and get me six
thousand rupees as fast as ever you can."

"No, no, Sister Rani," said Amulya, touched to the quick.  "Let
these jewels be.  I will get you six thousand all the same."

"Oh, don't be silly," I said impatiently.  "There is no time for
any nonsense.  Take this box.  Get away to Calcutta by the night
train.  And bring me the money by the day after tomorrow
positively."

Amulya took a diamond necklace out of the box, held it up to the
light and put it back gloomily.

"I know," I told him, "that you will never get the proper price
for these diamonds, so I am giving you jewels worth about thirty
thousand.  I don't care if they all go, but I must have that six
thousand without fail."

"Do you know, Sister Rani," said Amulya, "I have had a quarrel
with Sandip Babu over that six thousand rupees he took from you?
I cannot tell you how ashamed I felt.  But Sandip Babu would have
it that we must give up even our shame for the country.  That may
be so.  But this is somehow different.  I do not fear to die for
the country, to kill for the country--that much __Shakti__ has
been given me.  But I cannot forget the shame of having taken
money from you.  There Sandip Babu is ahead of me.  He has no
regrets or compunctions.  He says we must get rid of the idea
that the money belongs to the one in whose box it happens to be--
if we cannot, where is the magic of __Bande Mataram__?"

Amulya gathered enthusiasm as he talked on.  He always warms up
when he has me for a listener.  "The Gita tells us," he
continued, "that no one can kill the soul.  Killing is a mere
word.  So also is the taking away of money.  Whose is the money?
No one has created it.  No one can take it away with him when he
departs this life, for it is no part of his soul.  Today it is
mine, tomorrow my son's, the next day his creditor's.  Since, in
fact, money belongs to no one, why should any blame attach to our
patriots if, instead of leaving it for some worthless son, they
take it for their own use?"

When I hear Sandip's words uttered by this boy, I tremble all
over.  Let those who are snake-charmers play with snakes; if harm
comes to them, they are prepared for it.  But these boys are so
innocent, all the world is ready with its blessing to protect
them.  They play with a snake not knowing its nature, and when we
see them smilingly, trustfully, putting their hands within reach
of its fangs, then we understand how terribly dangerous the snake
is.  Sandip is right when he suspects that though I, for myself,
may be ready to die at his hands, this boy I shall wean from him
and save.

"So the money is wanted for the use of your patriots?"  I
questioned with a smile.

"Of course it is!"  said Amulya proudly.  "Are they not our
kings?  Poverty takes away from their regal power.  Do you know,
we always insist on Sandip Babu travelling First Class?  He never
shirks kingly honours--he accepts them not for himself, but for
the glory of us all.  The greatest weapon of those who rule the
world, Sandip Babu has told us, is the hypnotism of their
display.  To take the vow of poverty would be for them not merely
a penance--it would mean suicide."

At this point Sandip noiselessly entered the room.  I threw my
shawl over the jewel-case with a rapid movement.

"The special-talk business not yet over?"  he asked with a sneer
in his tone.

"Yes, we've quite finished," said Amulya apologetically.  "It was
nothing much."

"No, Amulya," I said, "we have not quite finished."

"So exit Sandip for the second time, I suppose?"  said Sandip.

"If you please."

"And as to Sandip's re-entry."

"Not today.  I have no time."

"I see!"  said Sandip as his eyes flashed.  "No time to waste,
only for special talks!"

Jealousy!  Where the strong man shows weakness, there the weaker
sex cannot help beating her drums of victory.  So I repeated
firmly: "I really have no time."

Sandip went away looking black.  Amulya was greatly perturbed.
"Sister Rani," he pleaded, "Sandip Babu is annoyed."

"He has neither cause nor right to be annoyed," I said with some
vehemence.  "Let me caution you about one thing, Amulya.  Say
nothing to Sandip Babu about the sale of my jewels--on your
life."

"No, I will not."

"Then you had better not delay any more.  You must get away by
tonight's train."

Amulya and I left the room together.  As we came out on the
verandah Sandip was standing there.  I could see he was waiting
to waylay Amulya.  To prevent that I had to engage him.  "What is
it you wanted to tell me, Sandip Babu?"  I asked.

"I have nothing special to say--mere small talk.  And since you
have not the time .  .  "

"I can give you just a little."

By this time Amulya had left.  As we entered the room Sandip
asked: "What was that box Amulya carried away?"

The box had not escaped his eyes.  I remained firm.  "If I could
have told you, it would have been made over to him in your
presence!"

"So you think Amulya will not tell me?"

"No, he will not."

Sandip could not conceal his anger any longer.  "You think you
will gain the mastery over me?"  he blazed out.  "That shall
never be.  Amulya, there, would die a happy death if I deigned to
trample him under foot.  I will never, so long as I live, allow
you to bring him to your feet!"

Oh, the weak!  the weak!  At last Sandip has realized that he is
weak before me!  That is why there is this sudden outburst of
anger.  He has understood that he cannot meet the power that I
wield, with mere strength.  With a glance I can crumble his
strongest fortifications.  So he must needs resort to bluster.  I
simply smiled in contemptuous silence.  At last have I come to a
level above him.  I must never lose this vantage ground; never
descend lower again.  Amidst all my degradation this bit of
dignity must remain to me!

"I know," said Sandip, after a pause, "it was your jewel-case."

"You may guess as you please," said I, "but you will get nothing
out of me.

"So you trust Amulya more than you trust me?  Do you know that
the boy is the shadow of my shadow, the echo of my echo--that he
is nothing if I am not at his side?"

"Where he is not your echo, he is himself, Amulya.  And that is
where I trust him more than I can trust your echo!"

"You must not forget that you are under a promise to render up
all your ornaments to me for the worship of the Divine Mother.
In fact your offering has already been made."

"Whatever ornaments the gods leave to me will be offered up to
the gods.  But how can I offer those which have been stolen away
from me?"

"Look here, it is no use your trying to give me the slip in that
fashion.  Now is the time for grim work.  Let that work be
finished, then you can make a display of your woman's wiles to
your heart's content--and I will help you in your game."

The moment I had stolen my husband's money and paid it to Sandip,
the music that was in our relations stopped.  Not only did I
destroy all my own value by making myself cheap, but Sandip's
powers, too, lost scope for their full play.  You cannot employ
your marksmanship against a thing which is right in your grasp.
So Sandip has lost his aspect of the hero; a tone of low
quarrelsomeness has come into his words.

Sandip kept his brilliant eyes fixed full on my face till they
seemed to blaze with all the thirst of the mid-day sky.  Once or
twice he fidgeted with his feet, as though to leave his seat, as
if to spring right on me.  My whole body seemed to swim, my veins
throbbed, the hot blood surged up to my ears; I felt that if I
remained there, I should never get up at all.  With a supreme
effort I tore myself off the chair, and hastened towards the
door.

From Sandip's dry throat there came a muffled cry: "Whither would
you flee, Queen?"  The next moment he left his seat with a bound
to seize hold of me.  At the sound of footsteps outside the door,
however, he rapidly retreated and fell back into his chair.  I
checked my steps near the bookshelf, where I stood staring at the
names of the books.

As my husband entered the room, Sandip exclaimed: "I say, Nikhil,
don't you keep Browning among your books here?  I was just
telling Queen Bee of our college club.  Do you remember that
contest of ours over the translation of those lines from
Browning?  You don't?

/*
  "She should never have looked at me,
  If she meant I should not love her,
  There are plenty ...  men you call such,
  I suppose ...  she may discover
  All her soul to, if she pleases,
  And yet leave much as she found them:
  But I'm not so, and she knew it
  When she fixed me, glancing round them.
*/

"I managed to get together the words to render it into Bengali,
somehow, but the result was hardly likely to be a 'joy forever'
to the people of Bengal.  I really did think at one time that I
was on the verge of becoming a poet, but Providence was kind
enough to save me from that disaster.  Do you remember old
Dakshina?  If he had not become a Salt Inspector, he would have
been a poet.  I remember his rendering to this day ...

"No, Queen Bee, it is no use rummaging those bookshelves.  Nikhil
has ceased to read poetry since his marriage--perhaps he has no
further need for it.  But I suppose 'the fever fit of poesy', as
the Sanskrit has it, is about to attack me again."

"I have come to give you a warning, Sandip," said my husband.

"About the fever fit of poesy?"

My husband took no notice of this attempt at humour.  "For some
time," he continued, "Mahomedan preachers have been about
stirring up the local Mussulmans.  They are all wild with you,
and may attack you any moment."

"Are you come to advise flight?"

"I have come to give you information, not to offer advice."

"Had these estates been mine, such a warning would have been
necessary for the preachers, not for me.  If, instead of trying
to frighten me, you give them a taste of your intimidation, that
would be worthier both of you and me.  Do you know that your
weakness is weakening your neighbouring __zamindars__ also?"

"I did not offer you my advice, Sandip.  I wish you, too, would
refrain from giving me yours.  Besides, it is useless.  And there
is another thing I want to tell you.  You and your followers have
been secretly worrying and oppressing my tenantry.  I cannot
allow that any longer.  So I must ask you to leave my territory."

"For fear of the Mussulmans, or is there any other fear you have
to threaten me with?"

"There are fears the want of which is cowardice.  In the name of
those fears, I tell you, Sandip, you must go.  In five days I
shall be starting for Calcutta.  I want you to accompany me.  You
may of course stay in my house there--to that there is no
objection."

"All right, I have still five day's time then.  Meanwhile, Queen
Bee, let me hum to you my song of parting from your honey-hive.
Ah!  you poet of modern Bengal!  Throw open your doors and let me
plunder your words.  The theft is really yours, for it is my song
which you have made your own--let the name be yours by all means,
but the song is mine."  With this Sandip struck up in a deep,
husky voice, which threatened to be out of tune, a song in the
Bhairavi mode:

/*
  "In the springtime of your kingdom, my Queen,
  Meetings and partings chase each other in their endless hide
    and seek,
  And flowers blossom in the wake of those that droop and die in
    the shade.
  In the springtime of your kingdom, my Queen,
  My meeting with you had its own songs,
  But has not also my leave-taking any gift to offer you?
  That gift is my secret hope, which I keep hidden in the shadows
    of your flower garden,
  That the rains of July may sweetly temper your fiery June."
*/

His boldness was immense--boldness which had no veil, but was naked
as fire.  One finds no time to stop it: it is like trying
to resist a thunderbolt: the lightning flashes: it laughs at all
resistance.

I left the room.  As I was passing along the verandah towards the
inner apartments, Amulya suddenly made his appearance and came
and stood before me.

"Fear nothing, Sister Rani," he said.  "I am off tonight and
shall not return unsuccessful."

"Amulya," said I, looking straight into his earnest, youthful
face, "I fear nothing for myself, but may I never cease to fear
for you."

Amulya turned to go, but before he was out of sight I called him
back and asked: "Have you a mother, Amulya?"

"I have."

"A sister?"

"No, I am the only child of my mother.  My father died when I was
quite little."

"Then go back to your mother, Amulya."

"But, Sister Rani, I have now both mother and sister."

"Then, Amulya, before you leave tonight, come and have your
dinner here."

"There won't be time for that.  Let me take some food for the
journey, consecrated with your touch."

"What do you specially like, Amulya?"
"If I had been with my mother I should have had lots of Poush
cakes.  Make some for me with your own hands, Sister Rani!"

------

25. Of the __Ramayana__.  The story of his devotion to his
elder brother Rama and his brother's wife Sita, has become a
byword.



Chapter Ten

Nikhil's Story

XII



I LEARNT from my master that Sandip had joined forces with Harish
Kundu, and there was to be a grand celebration of the worship of
the demon-destroying Goddess.  Harish Kundu was extorting the
expenses from his tenantry.  Pandits Kaviratna and Vidyavagish
had been commissioned to compose a hymn with a double meaning.

My master has just had a passage at arms with Sandip over this.
"Evolution is at work amongst the gods as well," says Sandip.
"The grandson has to remodel the gods created by the grandfather
to suit his own taste, or else he is left an atheist.  It is my
mission to modernize the ancient deities.  I am born the saviour
of the gods, to emancipate them from the thraldom of the past."

I have seen from our boyhood what a juggler with ideas is Sandip.
He has no interest in discovering truth, but to make a quizzical
display of it rejoices his heart.  Had he been born in the wilds
of Africa he would have spent a glorious time inventing argument
after argument to prove that cannibalism is the best means of
promoting true communion between man and man.  But those who deal
in delusion end by deluding themselves, and I fully believe that,
each time Sandip creates a new fallacy, he persuades himself that
he has found the truth, however contradictory his creations may
be to one another.

However, I shall not give a helping hand to establish a liquor
distillery in my country.  The young men, who are ready to offer
their services for their country's cause, must not fall into this
habit of getting intoxicated.  The people who want to exact work
by drugging methods set more value on the excitement than on the
minds they intoxicate.

I had to tell Sandip, in Bimala's presence, that he must go.
Perhaps both will impute to me the wrong motive.  But I must free
myself also from all fear of being misunderstood.  Let even
Bimala misunderstand me ...

A number of Mahomedan preachers are being sent over from Dacca.
The Mussulmans in my territory had come to have almost as much of
an aversion to the killing of cows as the Hindus.  But now cases
of cow-killing are cropping up here and there.  I had the news
first from some of my Mussulman tenants with expressions of their
disapproval.  Here was a situation which I could see would be
difficult to meet.  At the bottom was a pretence of fanaticism,
which would cease to be a pretence if obstructed.  That is just
where the ingenuity of the move came in!

I sent for some of my principal Hindu tenants and tried to get
them to see the matter in its proper light.  "We can be staunch
in our own convictions," I said, "but we have no control over
those of others.  For all that many of us are Vaishnavas, those
of us who are Shaktas go on with their animal sacrifices just the
same.  That cannot be helped.  We must, in the same way, let the
Mussulmans do as they think best.  So please refrain from all
disturbance."

"Maharaja," they replied, "these outrages have been unknown for
so long."

"That was so," I said, "because such was their spontaneous
desire.  Let us behave in such a way that the same may become
true, over again.  But a breach of the peace is not the way to
bring this about."

"No, Maharaja," they insisted, "those good old days are gone.
This will never stop unless you put it down with a strong hand."

"Oppression," I replied, "will not only not prevent cow-killing,
it may lead to the killing of men as well."

One of them had had an English education.  He had learnt to
repeat the phrases of the day.  "It is not only a question of
orthodoxy," he argued.  "Our country is mainly agricultural, and
cows are ..."

"Buffaloes in this country," I interrupted, "likewise give milk
and are used for ploughing.  And therefore, so long as we dance
frantic dances on our temple pavements, smeared with their blood,
their severed heads carried on our shoulders, religion will only
laugh at us if we quarrel with Mussulmans in her name, and
nothing but the quarrel itself will remain true.  If the cow
alone is to be held sacred from slaughter, and not the buffalo,
then that is bigotry, not religion."

"But are you not aware, sir, of what is behind all this?"
pursued the English-knowing tenant.  "This has only become
possible because the Mussulman is assured of safety, even if he
breaks the law.  Have you not heard of the Pachur case?"

"Why is it possible," I asked, "to use the Mussulmans thus, as
tools against us?  Is it not because we have fashioned them into
such with our own intolerance?  That is how Providence punishes
us.  Our accumulated sins are being visited on our own heads."

"Oh, well, if that be so, let them be visited on us.  But we
shall have our revenge.  We have undermined what was the greatest
strength of the authorities, their devotion to their own laws.
Once they were truly kings, dispensing justice; now they
themselves will become law-breakers, and so no better than
robbers.  This may not go down to history, but we shall carry it
in our hearts for all time ..."

The evil reports about me which are spreading from paper to paper
are making me notorious.  News comes that my effigy has been
burnt at the river-side burning-ground of the Chakravartis, with
due ceremony and enthusiasm; and other insults are in
contemplation.  The trouble was that they had come to ask me to
take shares in a Cotton Mill they wanted to start.  I had to tell
them that I did not so much mind the loss of my own money, but I
would not be a party to causing a loss to so many poor
shareholders.

"Are we to understand, Maharaja," said my visitors, "that the
prosperity of the country does not interest you?"

"Industry may lead to the country's prosperity," I explained,
"but a mere desire for its prosperity will not make for success
in industry.  Even when our heads were cool, our industries did
not flourish.  Why should we suppose that they will do so just
because we have become frantic?"

"Why not say plainly that you will not risk your money?"

"I will put in my money when I see that it is industry which
prompts you.  But, because you have lighted a fire, it does not
follow that you have the food to cook over it."

XIII



What is this?  Our Chakua sub-treasury looted!  A remittance of
seven thousand five hundred rupees was due from there to
headquarters.  The local cashier had changed the cash at the
Government Treasury into small currency notes for convenience in
carrying, and had kept them ready in bundles.  In the middle of
the night an armed band had raided the room, and wounded Kasim,
the man on guard.  The curious part of it was that they had taken
only six thousand rupees and left the rest scattered on the
floor, though it would have been as easy to carry that away also.
Anyhow, the raid of the dacoits was over; now the police raid
would begin.  Peace was out of the question.

When I went inside, I found the news had travelled before me.
"What a terrible thing, brother," exclaimed the Bara Rani.
"Whatever shall we do?"

I made light of the matter to reassure her.  "We still have
something left," I said with a smile.  "We shall manage to get
along somehow."

"Don't joke about it, brother dear.  Why are they all so angry
with you?  Can't you humour them?  Why put everybody out?"

"I cannot let the country go to rack and ruin, even if that would
please everybody."

"That was a shocking thing they did at the burning-grounds.  It's
a horrid shame to treat you so.  The Chota Rani has got rid of
all her fears by dint of the Englishwoman's teaching, but as for
me, I had to send for the priest to avert the omen before I could
get any peace of mind.  For my sake, dear, do get away to
Calcutta.  I tremble to think what they may do, if you stay on
here."

My sister-in-law's genuine anxiety touched me deeply.

"And, brother," she went on, "did I not warn you, it was not well
to keep so much money in your room?  They might get wind of it
any day.  It is not the money--but who knows..."

To calm her I promised to remove the money to the treasury at
once, and then get it away to Calcutta with the first escort
going.  We went together to my bedroom.  The dressing-room door
was shut.  When I knocked, Bimala called out: "I am dressing."

"I wonder at the Chota Rani," exclaimed my sister-in-law,
"dressing so early in the day!  One of their __Bande Mataram__
meetings, I suppose.  Robber Queen!"  she called out in jest to
Bimala.  "Are you counting your spoils inside?"

"I will attend to the money a little later," I said, as I came
away to my office room outside.

I found the Police Inspector waiting for me.  "Any trace of the
dacoits?"  I asked.

"I have my suspicions."

"On whom?"

"Kasim, the guard."

"Kasim?  But was he not wounded?"

"A mere nothing.  A flesh wound on the leg.  Probably self-
inflicted."

"But I cannot bring myself to believe it.  He is such a trusted
servant."

"You may have trusted him, but that does not prevent his being a
thief.  Have I not seen men trusted for twenty years together,
suddenly developing..."

"Even if it were so, I could not send him to gaol.  But why
should he have left the rest of the money lying about?"

"To put us off the scent.  Whatever you may say, Maharaja, he
must be an old hand at the game.  He mounts guard during his
watch, right enough, but I feel sure he has a finger in all the
dacoities going on in the neighbourhood."

With this the Inspector proceeded to recount the various methods
by which it was possible to be concerned in a dacoity twenty or
thirty miles away, and yet be back in time for duty.

"Have you brought Kasim here?"  I asked.

"No," was the reply, "he is in the lock-up.  The Magistrate is
due for the investigation."

"I want to see him," I said.

When I went to his cell he fell at my feet, weeping.  "In God's
name," he said, "I swear I did not do this thing."

"I do not doubt you, Kasim," I assured him.  "Fear nothing.  They
can do nothing to you, if you are innocent."

Kasim, however, was unable to give a coherent account of the
incident.  He was obviously exaggerating.  Four or five hundred
men, big guns, numberless swords, figured in his narrative.  It
must have been either his disturbed state of mind or a desire to
account for his easy defeat.  He would have it that this was
Harish Kundu's doing; he was even sure he had heard the voice of
Ekram, the head retainer of the Kundus.

"Look here, Kasim," I had to warn him, "don't you be dragging
other people in with your stories.  You are not called upon to
make out a case against Harish Kundu, or anybody else."

XIV



On returning home I asked my master to come over.  He shook his
head gravely.  "I see no good in this," said he--"this setting
aside of conscience and putting the country in its place.  All
the sins of the country will now break out, hideous and
unashamed."

"Who do you think could have ..."

"Don't ask me.  But sin is rampant.  Send them all away, right
away from here."

"I have given them one more day.  They will be leaving the day
after tomorrow."

"And another thing.  Take Bimala away to Calcutta.  She is
getting too narrow a view of the outside world from here, she
cannot see men and things in their true proportions.  Let her see
the world--men and their work--give her abroad vision."

"That is exactly what I was thinking."

"Well, don't make any delay about it.  I tell you, Nikhil, man's
history has to be built by the united effort of all the races in
the world, and therefore this selling of conscience for political
reasons--this making a fetish of one's country, won't do.  I know
that Europe does not at heart admit this, but there she has not
the right to pose as our teacher.  Men who die for the truth
become immortal: and, if a whole people can die for the truth, it
will also achieve immortality in the history of humanity.  Here,
in this land of India, amid the mocking laughter of Satan
piercing the sky, may the feeling for this truth become real!
What a terrible epidemic of sin has been brought into our country
from foreign lands..."

The whole day passed in the turmoil of investigation.  I was
tired out when I retired for the night.  I left over sending my
sister-in-law's money to the treasury till next morning.

I woke up from my sleep at dead of night.  The room was dark.  I
thought I heard a moaning somewhere.  Somebody must have been
crying.  Sounds of sobbing came heavy with tears like fitful
gusts of wind in the rainy night.  It seemed to me that the cry
rose from the heart of my room itself.  I was alone.  For some
days Bimala had her bed in another room adjoining mine.  I rose
up and when I went out I found her in the balcony lying prone
upon her face on the bare floor.

This is something that cannot be written in words.  He only knows
it who sits in the bosom of the world and receives all its pangs
in His own heart.  The sky is dumb, the stars are mute, the night
is still, and in the midst of it all that one sleepless cry!

We give these sufferings names, bad or good, according to the
classifications of the books, but this agony which is welling up
from a torn heart, pouring into the fathomless dark, has it any
name?  When in that midnight, standing under the silent stars, I
looked upon that figure, my mind was struck with awe, and I said
to myself: "Who am Ito judge her?"  O life, O death, O God of the
infinite existence, I bow my head in silence to the mystery which
is in you.

Once I thought I should turn back.  But I could not.  I sat down
on the ground near Bimala and placed my hand on her head.  At the
first touch her whole body seemed to stiffen, but the next moment
the hardness gave way, and the tears burst out.  I gently passed
my fingers over her forehead.  Suddenly her hands groping for my
feet grasped them and drew them to herself, pressing them against
her breast with such force that I thought her heart would break.



Bimala's Story

XVIII



Amulya is due to return from Calcutta this morning.  I told the
servants to let me know as soon as he arrived, but could not keep
still.  At last I went outside to await him in the sitting-room.

When I sent him off to sell the jewels I must have been thinking
only of myself.  It never even crossed my mind that so young a
boy, trying to sell such valuable jewellery, would at once be
suspected.  So helpless are we women, we needs must place on
others the burden of our danger.  When we go to our death we drag
down those who are about us.

I had said with pride that I would save Amulya--as if she who was
drowning could save others.  But instead of saving him, I have
sent him to his doom.  My little brother, such a sister have I
been to you that Death must have smiled on that Brothers' Day
when I gave you my blessing--I, who wander distracted with the
burden of my own evil-doing.

I feel today that man is at times attacked with evil as with the
plague.  Some germ finds its way in from somewhere, and then in
the space of one night Death stalks in.  Why cannot the stricken
one be kept far away from the rest of the world?  I, at least,
have realized how terrible is the contagion--like a fiery torch
which burns that it may set the world on fire.

It struck nine.  I could not get rid of the idea that Amulya was
in trouble, that he had fallen into the clutches of the police.
There must be great excitement in the Police Office--whose are
the jewels?--where did he get them?  And in the end I shall have
to furnish the answer, in public, before all the world.

What is that answer to be?  Your day has come at last, Bara Rani,
you whom I have so long despised.  You, in the shape of the
public, the world, will have your revenge.  O God, save me this
time, and I will cast all my pride at my sister-in-law's feet.

I could bear it no longer.  I went straight to the Bara Rani.
She was in the verandah, spicing her betel leaves, Thako at her
side.  The sight of Thako made me shrink back for a moment, but I
overcame all hesitation, and making a low obeisance I took the
dust of my elder sister-in-law's feet.

"Bless my soul, Chota Rani," she exclaimed, "what has come upon
you?  Why this sudden reverence?"

"It is my birthday, sister," said I.  "I have caused you pain.
Give me your blessing today that I may never do so again.  My
mind is so small."  I repeated my obeisance and left her
hurriedly, but she called me back.

"You never before told me that this was your birthday, Chotie
darling!  Be sure to come and have lunch with me this afternoon.
You positively must."

O God, let it really be my birthday today.  Can I not be born
over again?  Cleanse me, my God, and purify me and give me one
more trial!

I went again to the sitting-room to find Sandip there.  A feeling
of disgust seemed to poison my very blood.  The face of his,
which I saw in the morning light, had nothing of the magic
radiance of genius.

"Will you leave the room," I blurted out.

Sandip smiled.  "Since Amulya is not here," he remarked, "I
should think my turn had come for a special talk."

My fate was coming back upon me.  How was Ito take away the right
I myself had given.  "I would be alone," I repeated.

"Queen," he said, "the presence of another person does not
prevent your being alone.  Do not mistake me for one of the
crowd.  I, Sandip, am always alone, even when surrounded by
thousands."

"Please come some other time.  This morning I am ..."

"Waiting for Amulya?"

I turned to leave the room for sheer vexation, when Sandip drew
out from the folds of his cloak that jewel-casket of mine and
banged it down on the marble table.  I was thoroughly startled.
"Has not Amulya gone, then?"  I exclaimed.

"Gone where?"

"To Calcutta?"

"No," chuckled Sandip.

Ah, then my blessing had come true, in spite of all.  He was
saved.  Let God's punishment fall on me, the thief, if only
Amulya be safe.

The change in my countenance roused Sandip's scorn.  "So pleased,
Queen!"  sneered he.  "Are these jewels so very precious?  How
then did you bring yourself to offer them to the Goddess?  Your
gift was actually made.  Would you now take it back?"

Pride dies hard and raises its fangs to the last.  It was clear
to me I must show Sandip I did not care a rap about these jewels.
"If they have excited your greed," I said, "you may have them."

"My greed today embraces the wealth of all Bengal," replied
Sandip.  "Is there a greater force than greed?  It is the steed
of the great ones of the earth, as is the elephant, Airauat, the
steed of Indra.  So then these jewels are mine?"

As Sandip took up and replaced the casket under his cloak, Amulya
rushed in.  There were dark rings under his eyes, his lips were
dry, his hair tumbled: the freshness of his youth seemed to have
withered in a single day.  Pangs gripped my heart as I looked on
him.

"My box!"  he cried, as he went straight up to Sandip without a
glance at me.  "Have you taken that jewel-box from my trunk?"

"Your jewel-box?"  mocked Sandip.

"It was my trunk!"
Sandip burst out into a laugh.  "Your distinctions between mine
and yours are getting rather thin, Amulya," he cried.  "You will
die a religious preacher yet, I see."

Amulya sank on a chair with his face in his hands.  I went up to
him and placing my hand on his head asked him: "What is your
trouble, Amulya?"

He stood straight up as he replied: "I had set my heart, Sister
Rani, on returning your jewels to you with my own hand.  Sandip
Babu knew this, but he forestalled me."

"What do I care for my jewels?"  I said.  "Let them go.  No harm
is done.

"Go?  Where?"  asked the mystified boy.

"The jewels are mine," said Sandip.  "Insignia bestowed on me by
my Queen!"

"No, no, no," broke out Amulya wildly.  "Never, Sister Rani!  I
brought them back for you.  You shall not give them away to
anybody else."

"I accept your gift, my little brother," said I.  "But let him,
who hankers after them, satisfy his greed."

Amulya glared at Sandip like a beast of prey, as he growled:
"Look here, Sandip Babu, you know that even hanging has no
terrors for me.  If you dare take away that box of jewels ..."

With an attempt at a sarcastic laugh Sandip said: "You also ought
to know by this time, Amulya, that I am not the man to be afraid
of you."

"Queen Bee," he went on, turning to me, "I did not come here
today to take these jewels, I came to give them to you.  You
would have done wrong to take my gift at Amulya's hands.  In
order to prevent it, I had first to make them clearly mine.  Now
these my jewels are my gift to you.  Here they are!  Patch up any
understanding with this boy you like.  I must go.  You have been
at your special talks all these days together, leaving me out of
them.  If special happenings now come to pass, don't blame me.

"Amulya," he continued, "I have sent on your trunks and things to
your lodgings.  Don't you be keeping any belongings of yours in
my room any longer."  With this parting shot, Sandip flung out of
the room.

XIX



"I have had no peace of mind, Amulya," I said to him, "ever since
I sent you off to sell my jewels."

"Why, Sister Rani?"

"I was afraid lest you should get into trouble with them, lest
they should suspect you for a thief.  I would rather go without
that six thousand.  You must now do another thing for me--go home
at once, home to your mother."

Amulya produced a small bundle and said: "But, sister, I have got
the six thousand."

"Where from?"

"I tried hard to get gold," he went on, without replying to my
question, "but could not.  So I had to bring it in notes."

"Tell me truly, Amulya, swear by me, where did you get this
money?"

"That I will not tell you."

Everything seemed to grow dark before my eyes.  "What terrible
thing have you done, Amulya?"  I cried.  "Is it then ..."

"I know you will say I got this money wrongly.  Very well, I
admit it.  But I have paid the full price for my wrong-doing.  So
now the money is mine."

I no longer had any desire to learn more about it.  My very
blood-vessels contracted, making my whole body shrink within
itself.

"Take it away, Amulya," I implored.  "Put it back where you got
it from."

"That would be hard indeed!"

"It is not hard, brother dear.  It was an evil moment when you
first came to me.  Even Sandip has not been able to harm you as I
have done."

Sandip's name seemed to stab him.

"Sandip!"  he cried.  "It was you alone who made me come to know
that man for what he is.  Do you know, sister, he has not spent a
pice out of those sovereigns he took from you?  He shut himself
into his room, after he left you, and gloated over the gold,
pouring it out in a heap on the floor.  'This is not money,' he
exclaimed, 'but the petals of the divine lotus of power;
crystallized strains of music from the pipes that play in the
paradise of wealth!  I cannot find it in my heart to change them,
for they seem longing to fulfil their destiny of adorning the
neck of Beauty.  Amulya, my boy, don't you look at these with
your fleshly eye, they are Lakshmi's smile, the gracious radiance
of Indra's queen.  No, no, I can't give them up to that boor of a
manager.  I am sure, Amulya, he was telling us lies.  The police
haven't traced the man who sank that boat.  It's the manager who
wants to make something out of it.  We must get those letters
back from him.'

"I asked him how we were to do this; he told me to use force or
threats.  I offered to do so if he would return the gold.  That,
he said, we could consider later.  I will not trouble you,
sister, with all I did to frighten the man into giving up those
letters and burn them--it is a long story.  That very night I
came to Sandip and said: 'We are now safe.  Let me have the
sovereigns to return them tomorrow to my sister, the Maharani.'
But he cried, 'What infatuation is this of yours?  Your precious
sister's skirt bids fair to hide the whole country from you.  Say
__Bande Mataram__ and exorcize the evil spirit.'

"You know, Sister Rani, the power of Sandip's magic.  The gold
remained with him.  And I spent the whole dark night on the
bathing-steps of the lake muttering __Bande Mataram__.

"Then when you gave me your jewels to sell, I went again to
Sandip.  I could see he was angry with me.  But he tried not to
show it.  'If I still have them hoarded up in any box of mine you
may take them,' said he, as he flung me his keys.  They were
nowhere to be seen.  'Tell me where they are,' I said.  'I will
do so,' he replied, 'when I find your infatuation has left you.
Not now.'

"When I found I could not move him, I had to employ other
methods.  Then I tried to get the sovereigns from him in exchange
for my currency notes for six thousand rupees.  'You shall have
them,' he said, and disappeared into his bedroom, leaving me
waiting outside.  There he broke open my trunk and came straight
to you with your casket through some other passage.  He would not
let me bring it, and now he dares call it his gift.  How can I
tell how much he has deprived me of?  I shall never forgive him.

"But, oh sister, his power over me has been utterly broken.  And
it is you who have broken it!"

"Brother dear," said I, "if that is so, then my life is
justified.  But more remains to be done, Amulya.  It is not
enough that the spell has been destroyed.  Its stains must be
washed away.  Don't delay any longer, go at once and put back the
money where you took it from.  Can you not do it, dear?"

"With your blessing everything is possible, Sister Rani."

"Remember, it will not be your expiation alone, but mine also.  I
am a woman; the outside world is closed to me, else I would have
gone myself.  My hardest punishment is that I must put on you the
burden of my sin."

"Don't say that, sister.  The path I was treading was not your
path.  It attracted me because of its dangers and difficulties.
Now that your path calls me, let it be a thousand times more
difficult and dangerous, the dust of your feet will help me to
win through.  Is it then your command that this money be
replaced?"

"Not my command, brother mine, but a command from above."

"Of that I know nothing.  It is enough for me that this command
from above comes from your lips.  And, sister, I thought I had an
invitation here.  I must not lose that.  You must give me your
__prasad__ [26] before I go.  Then, if I can possibly manage
it, I will finish my duty in the evening."

Tears came to my eyes when I tried to smile as I said: "So be
it."

------

26. Food consecrated by the touch of a revered person.



Chapter Eleven

Bimala's Story

XX



WITH Amulya's departure my heart sank within me.  On what
perilous adventure had I sent this only son of his mother?  O
God, why need my expiation have such pomp and circumstance?
Could I not be allowed to suffer alone without inviting all this
multitude to share my punishment?  Oh, let not this innocent
child fall victim to Your wrath.

I called him back--"Amulya!"

My voice sounded so feebly, it failed to reach him.

I went up to the door and called again: "Amulya!"

He had gone.

"Who is there?"

"Rani Mother!"

"Go and tell Amulya Babu that I want him."

What exactly happened I could not make out--the man, perhaps, was
not familiar with Amulya's name--but he returned almost at once
followed by Sandip.

"The very moment you sent me away," he said as he came in, "I had
a presentiment that you would call me back.  The attraction of
the same moon causes both ebb and flow.  I was so sure of being
sent for, that I was actually waiting out in the passage.  As
soon as I caught sight of your man, coming from your room, I
said: 'Yes, yes, I am coming, I am coming at once!'--before he
could utter a word.  That up-country lout was surprised, I can
tell you!  He stared at me, open-mouthed, as if he thought I knew
magic.

"All the fights in the world, Queen Bee," Sandip rambled on, "are
really fights between hypnotic forces.  Spell cast against spell
--noiseless weapons which reach even invisible targets.  At last I
have met in you my match.  Your quiver is full, I know, you
artful warrior Queen!  You are the only one in the world who has
been able to turn Sandip out and call Sandip back, at your sweet
will.  Well, your quarry is at your feet.  What will you do with
him now?  Will you give him the coup de grâce, or keep him in
your cage?  Let me warn you beforehand, Queen, you will find the
beast as difficult to kill outright as to keep in bondage.
Anyway, why lose time in trying your magic weapons?"

Sandip must have felt the shadow of approaching defeat, and this
made him try to gain time by chattering away without waiting for
a reply.  I believe he knew that I had sent the messenger for
Amulya, whose name the man must have mentioned.  In spite of that
he had deliberately played this trick.  He was now trying to
avoid giving me any opening to tell him that it was Amulya I
wanted, not him.  But his stratagem was futile, for I could see
his weakness through it.  I must not yield up a pin's point of
the ground I had gained.

"Sandip Babu," I said, "I wonder how you can go on making these
endless speeches, without a stop.  Do you get them up by heart,
beforehand?"

Sandip's face flushed instantly.

"I have heard," I continued, "that our professional reciters keep
a book full of all kinds of ready-made discourses, which can be
fitted into any subject.  Have you also a book?"

Sandip ground out his reply through his teeth.  "God has given
you women a plentiful supply of coquetry to start with, and on
the top of that you have the milliner and the jeweller to help
you; but do not think we men are so helpless ..."

"You had better go back and look up your book, Sandip Babu.  You
are getting your words all wrong.  That's just the trouble with
trying to repeat things by rote."

"You!"  shouted Sandip, losing all control over himself.  "You to
insult me thus!  What is there left of you that I do not know to
the very bottom?  What ..."  He became speechless.

Sandip, the wielder of magic spells, is reduced to utter
powerlessness, whenever his spell refuses to work.  From a king
he fell to the level of a boor.  Oh, the joy of witnessing his
weakness!  The harsher he became in his rudeness, the more did
this joy well up within me.  His snaky coils, with which he used
to snare me, are exhausted--I am free.  I am saved, saved.  Be
rude to me, insult me, for that shows you in your truth; but
spare me your songs of praise, which were false.

My husband came in at this juncture.  Sandip had not the
elasticity to recover himself in a moment, as he used to do
before.  My husband looked at him for a while in surprise.  Had
this happened some days ago I should have felt ashamed.  But
today I was pleased--whatever my husband might think.  I wanted
to have it out to the finish with my weakening adversary.

Finding us both silent and constrained, my husband hesitated a
little, and then took a chair.  "Sandip," he said, "I have been
looking for you, and was told you were here."

"I am here," said Sandip with some emphasis.  "Queen Bee sent for
me early this morning.  And I, the humble worker of the hive,
left all else to attend her summons."

"I am going to Calcutta tomorrow.  You will come with me.

"And why, pray?  Do you take me for one of your retinue?"

"Oh, very well, take it that you are going to Calcutta, and that
I am your follower."

"I have no business there."

"All the more reason for going.  You have too much business
here."

"I don't propose to stir."

"Then I propose to shift you."

"Forcibly?"

"Forcibly."

"Very well, then, I will make a move.  But the world is not
divided between Calcutta and your estates.  There are other
places on the map."

"From the way you have been going on, one would hardly have
thought that there was any other place in the world except my
estates."

Sandip stood up.  "It does happen at times," he said, "that a
man's whole world is reduced to a single spot.  I have realized
my universe in this sitting-room of yours, that is why I have
been a fixture here."

Then he turned to me.  "None but you, Queen Bee," he said, "will
understand my words--perhaps not even you.  I salute you.  With
worship in my heart I leave you.  My watchword has changed since
you have come across my vision.  It is no longer __Bande
Mataram__ (Hail Mother), but Hail Beloved, Hail Enchantress.
The mother protects, the mistress leads to destruction--but sweet
is that destruction.  You have made the anklet sounds of the
dance of death tinkle in my heart.  You have changed for me, your
devotee, the picture I had of this Bengal of ours--'the soft
breeze-cooled land of pure water and sweet fruit.' [27] You have
no pity, my beloved.  You have come to me with your poison cup
and I shall drain it, either to die in agony or live triumphing
over death.

"Yes," he continued.  "The mother's day is past.  O love, my
love, you have made as naught for me the truth and right and
heaven itself.  All duties have become as shadows: all rules and
restraints have snapped their bonds.  O love, my love, I could
set fire to all the world outside this land on which you have set
your dainty feet, and dance in mad revel over the ashes ...
These are mild men.  These are good men.  They would do good to
all--as if this all were a reality!  No, no!  There is no reality
in the world save this one real love of mine.  I do you
reverence.  My devotion to you has made me cruel; my worship of
you has lighted the raging flame of destruction within me.  I am
not righteous.  I have no beliefs, I only believe in her whom,
above all else in the world, I have been able to realize."

Wonderful!  It was wonderful, indeed.  Only a minute ago I had
despised this man with all my heart.  But what I had thought to
be dead ashes now glowed with living fire.  The fire in him is
true, that is beyond doubt.  Oh why has God made man such a mixed
creature?  Was it only to show his supernatural sleight of hand?
Only a few minutes ago I had thought that Sandip, whom I had once
taken to be a hero, was only the stage hero of melodrama.  But
that is not so, not so.  Even behind the trappings of the
theatre, a true hero may sometimes be lurking.

There is much in Sandip that is coarse, that is sensuous, that is
false, much that is overlaid with layer after layer of fleshly
covering.  Yet--yet it is best to confess that there is a great
deal in the depths of him which we do not, cannot understand--
much in ourselves too.  A wonderful thing is man.  What great
mysterious purpose he is working out only the Terrible One [28]
knows--meanwhile we groan under the brunt of it.  Shiva is the
Lord of Chaos.  He is all Joy.  He will destroy our bonds.

I cannot but feel, again and again, that there are two persons in
me.  One recoils from Sandip in his terrible aspect of Chaos--the
other feels that very vision to be sweetly alluring.  The sinking
ship drags down all who are swimming round it.  Sandip is just
such a force of destruction.  His immense attraction gets hold of
one before fear can come to the rescue, and then, in the
twinkling of an eye, one is drawn away, irresistibly, from all
light, all good, all freedom of the sky, all air that can be
breathed--from lifelong accumulations, from everyday cares--right
to the bottom of dissolution.

From some realm of calamity has Sandip come as its messenger; and
as he stalks the land, muttering unholy incantations, to him
flock all the boys and youths.  The mother, seated in the lotus-
heart of the Country, is wailing her heart out; for they have
broken open her store-room, there to hold their drunken revelry.
Her vintage of the draught for the immortals they would pour out
on the dust; her time-honoured vessels they would smash to
pieces.  True, I feel with her; but, at the same time, I cannot
help being infected with their excitement.

Truth itself has sent us this temptation to test our trustiness
in upholding its commandments.  Intoxication masquerades in
heavenly garb, and dances before the pilgrims saying: "Fools you
are that pursue the fruitless path of renunciation.  Its way is
long, its time passing slow.  So the Wielder of the Thunderbolt
has sent me to you.  Behold, I the beautiful, the passionate, I
will accept you--in my embrace you shall find fulfilment."

After a pause Sandip addressed me again: "Goddess, the time has
come for me to leave you.  It is well.  The work of your nearness
has been done.  By lingering longer it would only become undone
again, little by little.  All is lost, if in our greed we try to
cheapen that which is the greatest thing on earth.  That which is
eternal within the moment only becomes shallow if spread out in
time.  We were about to spoil our infinite moment, when it was
your uplifted thunderbolt which came to the rescue.  You
intervened to save the purity of your own worship--and in so
doing you also saved your worshipper.  In my leave-taking today
your worship stands out the biggest thing.  Goddess, I, also, set
you free today.  My earthen temple could hold you no longer--
every moment it was on the point of breaking apart.  Today I
depart to worship your larger image in a larger temple.  I can
gain you more truly only at a distance from yourself.  Here I had
only your favour, there I shall be vouchsafed your boon."

My jewel-casket was lying on the table.  I held it up aloft as I
said: "I charge you to convey these my jewels to the object of my
worship--to whom I have dedicated them through you."

My husband remained silent.  Sandip left the room.

------

27. Quotation from the National song--__Bande Mataram__.

28. Rudra, the Terrible, a name of Shiva.  [Trans.].

XXI



I had just sat down to make some cakes for Amulya when the Bara
Rani came upon the scene.  "Oh dear," she exclaimed, "has it come
to this that you must make cakes for your own birthday?"

"Is there no one else for whom I could be making them?"  I asked.

"But this is not the day when you should think of feasting
others.  It is for us to feast you.  I was just thinking of
making something up [29] when I heard the staggering news which
completely upset me.  A gang of five or six hundred men, they
say, has raided one of our treasuries and made off with six
thousand rupees.  Our house will be looted next, they expect."

I felt greatly relieved.  So it was our own money after all.  I
wanted to send for Amulya at once and tell him that he need only
hand over those notes to my husband and leave the explanations to
me.

"You are a wonderful creature!"  my sister-in-law broke out, at
the change in my countenance.  "Have you then really no such
thing as fear?"

"I cannot believe it," I said.  "Why should they loot our house?"

"Not believe it, indeed!  Who could have believed that they would
attack our treasury, either?"

I made no reply, but bent over my cakes, putting in the cocoa-nut
stuffing.

"Well, I'm off," said the Bara Rani after a prolonged stare at
me.  "I must see Brother Nikhil and get something done about
sending off my money to Calcutta, before it's too late."

She was no sooner gone than I left the cakes to take care of
themselves and rushed to my dressing-room, shutting myself
inside.  My husband's tunic with the keys in its pocket was still
hanging there--so forgetful was he.  I took the key of the iron
safe off the ring and kept it by me, hidden in the folds of my
dress.

Then there came a knocking at the door.  "I am dressing," I
called out.  I could hear the Bara Rani saying: "Only a minute
ago I saw her making cakes and now she is busy dressing up.  What
next, I wonder!  One of their __Bande Mataram__ meetings is
on, I suppose.  I say, Robber Queen," she called out to me, "are
you taking stock of your loot?"

When they went away I hardly know what made me open the safe.
Perhaps there was a lurking hope that it might all be a dream.
What if, on pulling out the inside drawer, I should find the
rolls of gold there, just as before?  ...  Alas, everything was
empty as the trust which had been betrayed.

I had to go through the farce of dressing.  I had to do my hair
up all over again, quite unnecessarily.  When I came out my
sister-in-law railed at me: "How many times are you going to
dress today?"

"My birthday!"  I said.

"Oh, any pretext seems good enough," she went on.  "Many vain
people have I seen in my day, but you beat them all hollow."

I was about to summon a servant to send after Amulya, when one of
the men came up with a little note, which he handed to me.  It
was from Amulya.  "Sister," he wrote, "you invited me this
afternoon, but I thought I should not wait.  Let me first execute
your bidding and then come for my __prasad__.  I may be a
little late."

To whom could he be going to return that money?  into what fresh
entanglement was the poor boy rushing?  O miserable woman, you
can only send him off like an arrow, but not recall him if you
miss your aim.

I should have declared at once that I was at the bottom of this
robbery.  But women live on the trust of their surroundings--this
is their whole world.  If once it is out that this trust has been
secretly betrayed, their place in their world is lost.  They have
then to stand upon the fragments of the thing they have broken,
and its jagged edges keep on wounding them at every turn.  To sin
is easy enough, but to make up for it is above all difficult for
a woman.

For some time past all easy approaches for communion with my
husband have been closed to me.  How then could I burst on him
with this stupendous news?  He was very late in coming for his
meal today--nearly two o'clock.  He was absent-minded and hardly
touched any food.  I had lost even the right to press him to take
a little more.  I had to avert my face to wipe away my tears.

I wanted so badly to say to him: "Do come into our room and rest
awhile; you look so tired."  I had just cleared my throat with a
little cough, when a servant hurried in to say that the Police
Inspector had brought Panchu up to the palace.  My husband, with
the shadow on his face deepened, left his meal unfinished and
went out.

A little later the Bara Rani appeared.  "Why did you not send me
word when Brother Nikhil came in?"  she complained.  "As he was
late I thought I might as well finish my bath in the meantime.
However did he manage to get through his meal so soon?"

"Why, did you want him for anything?"

"What is this about both of you going off to Calcutta tomorrow?
All I can say is, I am not going to be left here alone.  I should
get startled out of my life at every sound, with all these
dacoits about.  Is it quite settled about your going tomorrow?"

"Yes," said I, though I had only just now heard it; and though,
moreover, I was not at all sure that before tomorrow our history
might not take such a turn as to make it all one whether we went
or stayed.  After that, what our home, our life would be like,
was utterly beyond my ken--it seemed so misty and phantom-like.

In a very few hours now my unseen fate would become visible.  Was
there no one who could keep on postponing the flight of these
hours, from day to day, and so make them long enough for me to
set things right, so far as lay in my power?  The time during
which the seed lies underground is long--so long indeed that one
forgets that there is any danger of its sprouting.  But once its
shoot shows up above the surface, it grows and grows so fast,
there is no time to cover it up, neither with skirt, nor body,
nor even life itself.

I will try to think of it no more, but sit quiet--passive and
callous--let the crash come when it may.  By the day after
tomorrow all will be over--publicity, laughter, bewailing,
questions, explanations--everything.

But I cannot forget the face of Amulya--beautiful, radiant with
devotion.  He did not wait, despairing, for the blow of fate to
fall, but rushed into the thick of danger.  In my misery I do him
reverence.  He is my boy-god.  Under the pretext of his
playfulness he took from me the weight of my burden.  He would
save me by taking the punishment meant for me on his own head.
But how am Ito bear this terrible mercy of my God?

Oh, my child, my child, I do you reverence.  Little brother mine,
I do you reverence.  Pure are you, beautiful are you, I do you
reverence.  May you come to my arms, in the next birth, as my own
child--that is my prayer.

------

29. Any dainties to be offered ceremonially should be made by the
lady of the house herself.  [Trans.].

XXII



Rumour became busy on every side.  The police were continually in
and out.  The servants of the house were in a great flurry.

Khema, my maid, came up to me and said: "Oh, Rani Mother! for
goodness" sake put away my gold necklace and armlets in your iron
safe."  To whom was I to explain that the Rani herself had been
weaving all this network of trouble, and had got caught in it,
too?  I had to play the benign protector and take charge of
Khema's ornaments and Thako's savings.  The milk-woman, in her
turn, brought along and kept in my room a box in which were a
Benares __sari__ and some other of her valued possessions.  "I
got these at your wedding," she told me.

When, tomorrow, my iron safe will be opened in the presence of
these--Khema, Thako, the milk-woman and all the rest ...  Let me
not think of it!  Let me rather try to think what it will be like
when this third day of Magh comes round again after a year has
passed.  Will all the wounds of my home life then be still as
fresh as ever?  ...

Amulya writes that he will come later in the evening.  I cannot
remain alone with my thoughts, doing nothing.  So I sit down
again to make cakes for him.  I have finished making quite a
quantity, but still I must go on.  Who will eat them?  I shall
distribute them amongst the servants.  I must do so this very
night.  Tonight is my limit.  Tomorrow will not be in my hands.

I went on untiringly, frying cake after cake.  Every now and then
it seemed to me that there was some noise in the direction of my
rooms, upstairs.  Could it be that my husband had missed the key
of the safe, and the Bara Rani had assembled all the servants to
help him to hunt for it?  No, I must not pay heed to these
sounds.  Let me shut the door.

I rose to do so, when Thako came panting in: "Rani Mother, oh,
Rani Mother!"

"Oh get away!"  I snapped out, cutting her short.  "Don't come
bothering me."

"The Bara Rani Mother wants you," she went on.  "Her nephew has
brought such a wonderful machine from Calcutta.  It talks like a
man.  Do come and hear it!"

I did not know whether to laugh or to cry.  So, of all things, a
gramophone needs must come on the scene at such a time, repeating
at every winding the nasal twang of its theatrical songs!  What a
fearsome thing results when a machine apes a man.

The shades of evening began to fall.  I knew that Amulya would
not delay to announce himself--yet I could not wait.  I summone
d a servant and said: "Go and tell Amulya Babu to come straight
in here."  The man came back after a while to say that Amulya was
not in--he had not come back since he had gone.

"Gone!"  The last word struck my ears like a wail in the
gathering darkness.  Amulya gone!  Had he then come like a streak
of light from the setting sun, only to be gone for ever?  All
kinds of possible and impossible dangers flitted through my mind.
It was I who had sent him to his death.  What if he was fearless?
That only showed his own greatness of heart.  But after this how
was Ito go on living all by myself?

I had no memento of Amulya save that pistol--his reverence-
offering.  It seemed to me that this was a sign given by
Providence.  This guilt which had contaminated my life at its
very root--my God in the form of a child had left with me the
means of wiping it away, and then vanished.  Oh the loving gift--
the saving grave that lay hidden within it!

I opened my box and took out the pistol, lifting it reverently to
my forehead.  At that moment the gongs clanged out from the
temple attached to our house.  I prostrated myself in salutation.

In the evening I feasted the whole household with my cakes.  "You
have managed a wonderful birthday feast--and all by yourself
too!"  exclaimed my sister-in-law.  "But you must leave something
for us to do."  With this she turned on her gramophone and let
loose the shrill treble of the Calcutta actresses all over the
place.  It seemed like a stable full of neighing fillies.

It got quite late before the feasting was over.  I had a sudden
longing to end my birthday celebration by taking the dust of my
husband's feet.  I went up to the bedroom and found him fast
asleep.  He had had such a worrying, trying day.  I raised the
edge of the mosquito curtain very very gently, and laid my head
near his feet.  My hair must have touched him, for he moved his
legs in his sleep and pushed my head away.

I then went out and sat in the west verandah.  A silk-cotton
tree, which had shed all its leaves, stood there in the distance,
like a skeleton.  Behind it the crescent moon was setting.  All
of a sudden I had the feeling that the very stars in the sky were
afraid of me--that the whole of the night world was looking
askance at me.  Why?  Because I was alone.

There is nothing so strange in creation as the man who is alone.
Even he whose near ones have all died, one by one, is not alone--
companionship comes for him from behind the screen of death.  But
he, whose kin are there, yet no longer near, who has dropped out
of all the varied companionship of a full home--the starry
universe itself seems to bristle to look on him in his darkness.

Where I am, I am not.  I am far away from those who are around
me.  I live and move upon a world-wide chasm of separation,
unstable as the dew-drop upon the lotus leaf.

Why do not men change wholly when they change?  When I look into
my heart, I find everything that was there, still there--only
they are topsy-turvy.  Things that were well-ordered have become
jumbled up.  The gems that were strung into a necklace are now
rolling in the dust.  And so my heart is breaking.

I feel I want to die.  Yet in my heart everything still lives--
nor even in death can I see the end of it all: rather, in death
there seems to be ever so much more of repining.  What is to be
ended must be ended in this life--there is no other way out.

Oh forgive me just once, only this time, Lord!  All that you gave
into my hands as the wealth of my life, I have made into my
burden.  I can neither bear it longer, nor give it up.  O Lord,
sound once again those flute strains which you played for me,
long ago, standing at the rosy edge of my morning sky--and let
all my complexities become simple and easy.  Nothing save the
music of your flute can make whole that which has been broken,
and pure that which has been sullied.  Create my home anew with
your music.  No other way can I see.

I threw myself prone on the ground and sobbed aloud.  It was for
mercy that I prayed--some little mercy from somewhere, some
shelter, some sign of forgiveness, some hope that might bring
about the end.  "Lord," I vowed to myself, "I will lie here,
waiting and waiting, touching neither food nor drink, so long as
your blessing does not reach me."

I heard the sound of footsteps.  Who says that the gods do not
show themselves to mortal men?  I did not raise my face to look
up, lest the sight of it should break the spell.  Come, oh come,
come and let your feet touch my head.  Come, Lord, and set your
foot upon my throbbing heart, and at that moment let me die.

He came and sat near my head.  Who?  My husband!  At the first
touch of his presence I felt that I should swoon.  And then the
pain at my heart burst its way out in an overwhelming flood of
tears, tearing through all my obstructing veins and nerves.  I
strained his feet to my bosom--oh, why could not their impress
remain there for ever?

He tenderly stroked my head.  I received his blessing.  Now I
shall be able to take up the penalty of public humiliation which
will be mine tomorrow, and offer it, in all sincerity, at the
feet of my God.

But what keeps crushing my heart is the thought that the festive
flutes which were played at my wedding, nine years ago, welcoming
me to this house, will never sound for me again in this life.
What rigour of penance is there which can serve to bring me once
more, as a bride adorned for her husband, to my place upon that
same bridal seat?  How many years, how many ages, aeons, must
pass before I can find my way back to that day of nine years ago?

God can create new things, but has even He the power to create
afresh that which has been destroyed?



Chapter Twelve

Nikhil's Story

XV



TODAY we are going to Calcutta.  Our joys and sorrows lie heavy
on us if we merely go on accumulating them.  Keeping them and
accumulating them alike are false.  As master of the house I am
in an artificial position--in reality I am a wayfarer on the path
of life.  That is why the true Master of the House gets hurt at
every step and at last there comes the supreme hurt of death.

My union with you, my love, was only of the wayside; it was well
enough so long as we followed the same road; it will only hamper
us if we try to preserve it further.  We are now leaving its
bonds behind.  We are started on our journey beyond, and it will
be enough if we can throw each other a glance, or feel the touch
of each other's hands in passing.  After that?  After that there
is the larger world-path, the endless current of universal life.

How little can you deprive me of, my love, after all?  Whenever I
set my ear to it, I can hear the flute which is playing, its
fountain of melody gushing forth from the flute-stops of
separation.  The immortal draught of the goddess is never
exhausted.  She sometimes breaks the bowl from which we drink it,
only to smile at seeing us so disconsolate over the trifling
loss.  I will not stop to pick up my broken bowl.  I will march
forward, albeit with unsatisfied heart.

The Bara Rani came and asked me: "What is the meaning, brother,
of all these books being packed up and sent off in box-loads?"

"It only means," I replied, "that I have not yet been able to get
over my fondness for them."

"I only wish you would keep your fondness for some other things
as well!  Do you mean you are never coming back home?"

"I shall be coming and going, but shall not immure myself here
any more."

"Oh indeed!  Then just come along to my room and see how many
things __I__ have been unable to shake off __my__ fondness
for."  With this she took me by the hand and marched me off.

In my sister-in-law's rooms I found numberless boxes and bundles
ready packed.  She opened one of the boxes and said: "See,
brother, look at all my __pan__-making things.  In this bottle
I have catechu powder scented with the pollen of screw-pine
blossoms.  These little tin boxes are all for different kinds of
spices.  I have not forgotten my playing cards and draught-board
either.  If you two are over-busy, I shall manage to make other
friends there, who will give me a game.  Do you remember this
comb?  It was one of the __Swadeshi__ combs you brought for
me..."

"But what is all this for, Sister Rani?  Why have you been
packing up all these things?"

"Do you think I am not going with you?"

"What an extraordinary idea!"

"Don't you be afraid!  I am not going there to flirt with you,
nor to quarrel with the Chota Rani!  One must die sooner or
later, and it is just as well to be on the bank of the holy
Ganges before it is too late.  It is too horrible to think of
being cremated in your wretched burning-ground here, under that
stumpy banian tree--that is why I have been refusing to die, and
have plagued you all this time."

At last I could hear the true voice of home.  The Bara Rani came
into our house as its bride, when I was only six years old.  We
have played together, through the drowsy afternoons, in a corner
of the roof-terrace.  I have thrown down to her green amras from
the tree-top, to be made into deliciously indigestible chutnies
by slicing them up with mustard, salt and fragrant herbs.  It was
my part to gather for her all the forbidden things from the
store-room to be used in the marriage celebration of her doll;
for, in the penal code of my grandmother, I alone was exempt from
punishment.  And I used to be appointed her messenger to my
brother, whenever she wanted to coax something special out of
him, because he could not resist my importunity.  I also remember
how, when I suffered under the rigorous régime of the doctors of
those days--who would not allow anything except warm water and
sugared cardamom seeds during feverish attacks--my sister-in-law
could not bear my privation and used to bring me delicacies on
the sly.  What a scolding she got one day when she was caught!

And then, as we grew up, our mutual joys and sorrows took on
deeper tones of intimacy.  How we quarrelled!  Sometimes
conflicts of worldly interests roused suspicions and jealousies,
making breaches in our love; and when the Chota Rani came in
between us, these breaches seemed as if they would never be
mended, but it always turned out that the healing forces at
bottom proved more powerful than the wounds on the surface.

So has a true relationship grown up between us, from our
childhood up till now, and its branching foliage has spread and
broadened over every room and verandah and terrace of this great
house.  When I saw the Bara Rani make ready, with all her
belongings, to depart from this house of ours, all the ties that
bound us, to their wide-spreading ends, felt the shock.

The reason was clear to me, why she had made up her mind to drift
away towards the unknown, cutting asunder all her lifelong bonds
of daily habit, and of the house itself, which she had never left
for a day since she first entered it at the age of nine.  And yet
it was this real reason which she could not allow to escape her
lips, preferring rather to put forward any other paltry excuse.

She had only this one relationship left in all the world, and the
poor, unfortunate, widowed and childless woman had cherished it
with all the tenderness hoarded in her heart.  How deeply she had
felt our proposed separation I never realized so keenly as when I
stood amongst her scattered boxes and bundles.

I could see at once that the little differences she used to have
with Bimala, about money matters, did not proceed from any sordid
worldliness, but because she felt that her claims in regard to
this one relationship of her life had been overridden and its
ties weakened for her by the coming in between of this other
woman from goodness knows where!  She had been hurt at every turn
and yet had not the right to complain.

And Bimala?  She also had felt that the Senior Rani's claim over
me was not based merely on our social connection, but went much
deeper; and she was jealous of these ties between us, reaching
back to our childhood.

Today my heart knocked heavily against the doors of my breast.  I
sank down upon one of the boxes as I said: "How I should love,
Sister Rani, to go back to the days when we first met in this old
house of ours."

"No, brother dear," she replied with a sigh, "I would not live my
life again--not as a woman!  Let what I have had to bear end with
this one birth.  I could not bear it over again."

I said to her: "The freedom to which we pass through sorrow is
greater than the sorrow."

"That may be so for you men.  Freedom is for you.  But we women
would keep others bound.  We would rather be put into bondage
ourselves.  No, no, brother, you will never get free from our
toils.  If you needs must spread your wings, you will have to
take us with you; we refuse to be left behind.  That is why I
have gathered together all this weight of luggage.  It would
never do to allow men to run too light."

"I can feel the weight of your words," I said laughing, "and if
we men do not complain of your burdens, it is because women pay
us so handsomely for what they make us carry."

"You carry it," she said, "because it is made up of many small
things.  Whichever one you think of rejecting pleads that it is
so light.  And so with much lightness we weigh you down ...  When
do we start?"

"The train leaves at half past eleven tonight.  There will be
lots of time."

"Look here, do be good for once and listen to just one word of
mine.  Take a good nap this afternoon.  You know you never get
any sleep in the train.  You look so pulled down, you might go to
pieces any moment.  Come along, get through your bath first."

As we went towards my room, Khema, the maid, came up and with an
ultra-modest pull at her veil told us, in deprecatingly low
tones, that the Police Inspector had arrived with a prisoner and
wanted to see the Maharaja.

"Is the Maharaja a thief, or a robber," the Bara Rani flared up,
"that he should be set upon so by the police?  Go and tell the
Inspector that the Maharaja is at his bath."

"Let me just go and see what is the matter," I pleaded.  "It may
be something urgent."

"No, no," my sister-in-law insisted.  "Our Chota Rani was making
a heap of cakes last night.  I'll send some to the Inspector, to
keep him quiet till you're ready."  With this she pushed me into
my room and shut the door on me.

I had not the power to resist such tyranny--so rare is it in this
world.  Let the Inspector while away the time eating cakes.  What
if business is a bit neglected?

The police had been in great form these last few days arresting
now this one, now that.  Each day some innocent person or other
would be brought along to enliven the assembly in my office-room.
One more such unfortunate, I supposed, must have been brought in
that day.  But why should the Inspector alone be regaled with
cakes?  That would not do at all.  I thumped vigorously on the
door.

"If you are going mad, be quick and pour some water over your
head--that will keep you cool," said my sister-in-law from the
passage.

"Send down cakes for two," I shouted.  "The person who has been
brought in as the thief probably deserves them better.  Tell the
man to give him a good big helping."

I hurried through my bath.  When I came out, I found Bimal
sitting on the floor outside.  [30] Could this be my Bimal of
old, my proud, sensitive Bimal?

What favour could she be wanting to beg, seated like this at my
door?

As I stopped short, she stood up and said gently with downcast
eyes: "I would have a word with you."

"Come inside then," I said.

"But are you going out on any particular business?"

"I was, but let that be.  I want to hear ..."

"No, finish your business first.  We will have our talk after you
have had your dinner."

I went off to my sitting-room, to find the Police Inspector's
plate quite empty.  The person he had brought with him, however,
was still busy eating.

"Hullo!"  I ejaculated in surprise.  "You, Amulya?"

"It is I, sir," said Amulya with his mouth full of cake.  "I've
had quite a feast.  And if you don't mind, I'll take the rest
with me."  With this he proceeded to tie up the remaining cakes
in his handkerchief.

"What does this mean?"  I asked, staring at the Inspector.

The man laughed.  "We are no nearer, sir," he said, "to solving
the problem of the thief: meanwhile the mystery of the theft
deepens."  He then produced something tied up in a rag, which
when untied disclosed a bundle of currency notes.  "This,
Maharaja," said the Inspector, "is your six thousand rupees!"

"Where was it found?"

"In Amulya Babu's hands.  He went last evening to the manager of
your Chakna sub-office to tell him that the money had been found.
The manager seemed to be in a greater state of trepidation at the
recovery than he had been at the robbery.  He was afraid he would
be suspected of having made away with the notes and of now making
up a cock-and-bull story for fear of being found out.  He asked
Amulya to wait, on the pretext of getting him some refreshment,
and came straight over to the Police Office.  I rode off at once,
kept Amulya with me, and have been busy with him the whole
morning.  He refuses to tell us where he got the money from.  I
warned him he would be kept under restraint till he did so.  In
that case, he informed me he would have to lie.  Very well, I
said, he might do so if he pleased.  Then he stated that he had
found the money under a bush.  I pointed out to him that it was
not quite so easy to lie as all that.  Under what bush?  Where
was the place?  Why was he there?--All this would have to be
stated as well.  'Don't you worry,' he said, 'there is plenty of
time to invent all that.'"

"But, Inspector," I said, "why are you badgering a respectable
young gentleman like Amulya Babu?"

"I have no desire to harass him," said the Inspector.  "He is not
only a gentleman, but the son of Nibaran Babu, my school-fellow.
Let me tell you, Maharaja, exactly what must have happened.
Amulya knows the thief, but wants to shield him by drawing
suspicion on himself.  That is just the sort of bravado he loves
to indulge in."  The Inspector turned to Amulya.  "Look here,
young man," he continued, "I also was eighteen once upon a time,
and a student in the Ripon College.  I nearly got into gaol
trying to rescue a hack driver from a police constable.  It was a
near shave."  Then he turned again to me and said: "Maharaja, the
real thief will now probably escape, but I think I can tell you
who is at the bottom of it all."

"Who is it, then?"  I asked.

"The manager, in collusion with the guard, Kasim."

When the Inspector, having argued out his theory to his own
satisfaction, at last departed, I said to Amulya: "If you will
tell me who took the money, I promise you no one shall be hurt."

"I did," said he.

"But how can that be?  What about the gang of armed men?..."

"It was I, by myself, alone!"

What Amulya then told me was indeed extraordinary.  The manager
had just finished his supper and was on the verandah rinsing out
his mouth.  The place was somewhat dark.  Amulya had a revolver
in each pocket, one loaded with blank cartridges, the other with
ball.  He had a mask over his face.  He flashed a bull's-eye
lantern in the manager's face and fired a blank shot.  The man
swooned away.  Some of the guards, who were off duty, came
running up, but when Amulya fired another blank shot at them they
lost no time in taking cover.  Then Kasim, who was on duty, came
up whirling a quarterstaff.  This time Amulya aimed a bullet at
his legs, and finding himself hit, Kasim collapsed on the floor.
Amulya then made the trembling manager, who had come to his
senses, open the safe and deliver up six thousand rupees.
Finally, he took one of the estate horses and galloped off a few
miles, there let the animal loose, and quietly walked up here, to
our place.

"What made you do all this, Amulya?"  I asked.

"There was a grave reason, Maharaja," he replied.

"But why, then, did you try to return the money?"

"Let her come, at whose command I did so.  In her presence I
shall make a clean breast of it."

"And who may 'she' be?"

"My sister, the Chota Rani!"

I sent for Bimala.  She came hesitatingly, barefoot, with a white
shawl over her head.  I had never seen my Bimal like this before.
She seemed to have wrapped herself in a morning light.

Amulya prostrated himself in salutation and took the dust of her
feet.  Then, as he rose, he said: "Your command has been
executed, sister.  The money is returned."

"You have saved me, my little brother," said Bimal.

"With your image in my mind, I have not uttered a single lie,"
Amulya continued.  "My watchword __Bande Mataram__ has been
cast away at your feet for good.  I have also received my reward,
your __prasad__, as soon as I came to the palace."

Bimal looked at him blankly, unable to follow his last words.
Amulya brought out his handkerchief, and untying it showed her
the cakes put away inside.  "I did not eat them all," he said.
"I have kept these to eat after you have helped me with your own
hands."

I could see that I was not wanted here.  I went out of the room.
I could only preach and preach, so I mused, and get my effigy
burnt for my pains.  I had not yet been able to bring back a
single soul from the path of death.  They who have the power, can
do so by a mere sign.  My words have not that ineffable meaning.
I am not a flame, only a black coal, which has gone out.  I can
light no lamp.  That is what the story of my life shows--my row
of lamps has remained unlit.

------

30. Sitting on the bare floor is a sign of mourning, and so, by
association of ideas, of an abject attitude of mind.  [Trans.].

XVI



I returned slowly towards the inner apartments.  The Bara Rani's
room must have been drawing me again.  It had become an absolute
necessity for me, that day, to feel that this life of mine had
been able to strike some real, some responsive chord in some
other harp of life.  One cannot realize one's own existence by
remaining within oneself--it has to be sought outside.

As I passed in front of my sister-in-law's room, she came out
saying: "I was afraid you would be late again this afternoon.
However.  I ordered your dinner as soon as I heard you coming.
It will be served in a minute."

"Meanwhile," I said; "let me take out that money of yours and
have it kept ready to take with us."

As we walked on towards my room she asked me if the Police
Inspector had made any report about the robbery.  I somehow did
not feel inclined to tell her all the details of how that six
thousand had come back.  "That's just what all the fuss is
about," I said evasively.

When I went into my dressing-room and took out my bunch of keys,
I did not find the key of the iron safe on the ring.  What an
absurdly absent-minded fellow I was, to be sure!  Only this
morning I had been opening so many boxes and things, and never
noticed that this key was not there.

"What has happened to your key?"  she asked me.

I went on fumbling in this pocket and that, but could give her no
answer.  I hunted in the same place over and over again.  It
dawned on both of us that it could not be a case of the key being
mislaid.  Someone must have taken it off the ring.  Who could it
be?  Who else could have come into this room?

"Don't you worry about it," she said to me.  "Get through your
dinner first.  The Chota Rani must have kept it herself, seeing
how absent-minded you are getting."

I was, however, greatly disturbed.  It was never Bimal's habit to
take any key of mine without telling me about it.  Bimal was not
present at my meal-time that day: she was busy feasting Amulya in
her own room.  My sister-in-law wanted to send for her, but I
asked her not to do so.

I had just finished my dinner when Bimal came in.  I would have
preferred not to discuss the matter of the key in the Bara Rani's
presence, but as soon as she saw Bimal, she asked her: "Do you
know, dear, where the key of the safe is?"

"I have it," was the reply.

"Didn't I say so!"  exclaimed my sister-in-law triumphantly.
"Our Chota Rani pretends not to care about these robberies, but
she takes precautions on the sly, all the same."

The look on Bimal's face made my mind misgive me.  "Let the key
be, now," I said.  "I will take out that money in the evening."

"There you go again, putting it off," said the Bara Rani.  "Why
not take it out and send it to the treasury while you have it in
mind?"

"I have taken it out already," said Bimal.

I was startled.

"Where have you kept it, then?"  asked my sister-in-law.

"I have spent it."

"Just listen to her!  Whatever did you spend all that money on?"

Bimal made no reply.  I asked her nothing further.  The Bara Rani
seemed about to make some further remark to Bimala, but checked
herself.  "Well, that is all right, anyway," she said at length,
as she looked towards me.  "Just what I used to do with my
husband's loose cash.  I knew it was no use leaving it with him--
his hundred and one hangers-on would be sure to get hold of it.
You are much the same, dear!  What a number of ways you men know
of getting through money.  We can only save it from you by
stealing it ourselves!  Come along now.  Off with you to bed."

The Bara Rani led me to my room, but I hardly knew where I was
going.  She sat by my bed after I was stretched on it, and smiled
at Bimal as she said: "Give me one of your pans, Chotie darling--
what?  You have none!  You have become a regular mem-sahib.  Then
send for some from my room."

"But have you had your dinner yet?"  I anxiously enquired.

"Oh long ago," she replied--clearly a fib.

She kept on chattering away there at my bedside, on all manner of
things.  The maid came and told Bimal that her dinner had been
served and was getting cold, but she gave no sign of having heard
it.  "Not had your dinner yet?  What nonsense!  It's fearfully
late."  With this the Bara Rani took Bimal away with her.

I could divine that there was some connection between the taking
out of this six thousand and the robbing of the other.  But I
have no curiosity to learn the nature of it.  I shall never ask.

Providence leaves our life moulded in the rough--its object being
that we ourselves should put the finishing touches, shaping it
into its final form to our taste.  There has always been the
hankering within me to express some great idea in the process of
giving shape to my life on the lines suggested by the Creator.
In this endeavour I have spent all my days.  How severely I have
curbed my desires, repressed myself at every step, only the
Searcher of the Heart knows.

But the difficulty is, that one's life is not solely one's own.
He who would create it must do so with the help of his
surroundings, or he will fail.  So it was my constant dream to
draw Bimal to join me in this work of creating myself.  I loved
her with all my soul; on the strength of that, I could not but
succeed in winning her to my purpose--that was my firm belief.

Then I discovered that those who could simply and naturally draw
their environment into the process of their self-creation
belonged to one species of the genus "man",--and I to another.  I
had received the vital spark, but could not impart it.  Those to
whom I have surrendered my all have taken my all, but not myself
with it.

My trial is hard indeed.  Just when I want a helpmate most, I am
thrown back on myself alone.  Nevertheless, I record my vow that
even in this trial I shall win through.  Alone, then, shall I
tread my thorny path to the end of this life's journey ...

I have begun to suspect that there has all along been a vein of
tyranny in me.  There was a despotism in my desire to mould my
relations with Bimala in a hard, clear-cut, perfect form.  But
man's life was not meant to be cast in a mould.  And if we try to
shape the good, as so much mere material, it takes a terrible
revenge by losing its life.

I did not realize all this while that it must have been this
unconscious tyranny of mine which made us gradually drift apart.
Bimala's life, not finding its true level by reason of my
pressure from above, has had to find an outlet by undermining its
banks at the bottom.  She has had to steal this six thousand
rupees because she could not be open with me, because she felt
that, in certain things, I despotically differed from her.

Men, such as I, possessed with one idea, are indeed at one with
those who can manage to agree with us; but those who do not, can
only get on with us by cheating us.  It is our unyielding
obstinacy, which drives even the simplest to tortuous ways.  In
trying to manufacture a helpmate, we spoil a wife.

Could I not go back to the beginning?  Then, indeed, I should
follow the path of the simple.  I should not try to fetter my
life's companion with my ideas, but play the joyous pipes of my
love and say: "Do you love me?  Then may you grow true to
yourself in the light of your love.  Let my suggestions be
suppressed, let God's design, which is in you, triumph, and my
ideas retire abashed."

But can even Nature's nursing heal the open wound, into which our
accumulated differences have broken out?  The covering veil,
beneath the privacy of which Nature's silent forces alone can
work, has been torn asunder.  Wounds must be bandaged--can we not
bandage our wound with our love, so that the day may come when
its scar will no longer be visible?  It is not too late?  So much
time has been lost in misunderstanding; it has taken right up to
now to come to an understanding; how much more time will it take
for the correcting?  What if the wound does eventually heal?--can
the devastation it has wrought ever be made good?

There was a slight sound near the door.  As I turned over I saw
Bimala's retreating figure through the open doorway.  She must
have been waiting by the door, hesitating whether to come in or
not, and at last have decided to go back.  I jumped up and
bounded to the door, calling: "Bimal."

She stopped on her way.  She had her back to me.  I went and took
her by the hand and led her into our room.  She threw herself
face downwards on a pillow, and sobbed and sobbed.  I said
nothing, but held her hand as I sat by her head.

When her storm of grief had abated she sat up.  I tried to draw
her to my breast, but she pushed my arms away and knelt at my
feet, touching them repeatedly with her head, in obeisance.  I
hastily drew my feet back, but she clasped them in her arms,
saying in a choking voice: "No, no, no, you must not take away
your feet.  Let me do my worship."

I kept still.  Who was I to stop her?  Was I the god of her
worship that I should have any qualms?



Bimala's Story

XXIII



Come, come!  Now is the time to set sail towards that great
confluence, where the river of love meets the sea of worship.  In
that pure blue all the weight of its muddiness sinks and
disappears.

I now fear nothing--neither myself, nor anybody else.  I have
passed through fire.  What was inflammable has been burnt to
ashes; what is left is deathless.  I have dedicated myself to the
feet of him, who has received all my sin into the depths of his
own pain.

Tonight we go to Calcutta.  My inward troubles have so long
prevented my looking after my things.  Now let me arrange and
pack them.

After a while I found my husband had come in and was taking a
hand in the packing.

"This won't do," I said.  "Did you not promise me you would have
a sleep?"

"I might have made the promise," he replied, "but my sleep did
not, and it was nowhere to be found."

"No, no," I repeated, "this will never do.  Lie down for a while,
at least."

"But how can you get through all this alone?"

"Of course I can."

"Well, you may boast of being able to do without me.  But frankly
I can't do without you.  Even sleep refused to come to me, alone,
in that room."  Then he set to work again.

But there was an interruption, in the shape of a servant, who
came and said that Sandip Babu had called and had asked to be
announced.  I did not dare to ask whom he wanted.  The light of
the sky seemed suddenly to be shut down, like the leaves of a
sensitive plant.

"Come, Bimal," said my husband.  "Let us go and hear what Sandip
has to tell us.  Since he has come back again, after taking his
leave, he must have something special to say."

I went, simply because it would have been still more embarrassing
to stay.  Sandip was staring at a picture on the wall.  As we
entered he said: "You must be wondering why the fellow has
returned.  But you know the ghost is never laid till all the
rites are complete."  With these words he brought out of his
pocket something tied in his handkerchief, and laying it on the
table, undid the knot.  It was those sovereigns.

"Don't you mistake me, Nikhil," he said.  "You must not imagine
that the contagion of your company has suddenly turned me honest;
I am not the man to come back in slobbering repentance to return
ill-gotten money.  But..."

He left his speech unfinished.  After a pause he turned towards
Nikhil, but said to me: "After all these days, Queen Bee, the
ghost of compunction has found an entry into my hitherto
untroubled conscience.  As I have to wrestle with it every night,
after my first sleep is over, I cannot call it a phantom of my
imagination.  There is no escape even for me till its debt is
paid.  Into the hands of that spirit, therefore, let me make
restitution.  Goddess!  From you, alone, of all the world, I
shall not be able to take away anything.  I shall not be rid of
you till I am destitute.  Take these back!"

He took out at the same time the jewel-casket from under his
tunic and put it down, and then left us with hasty steps.

"Listen to me, Sandip," my husband called after him.

"I have not the time, Nikhil," said Sandip as he paused near the
door.  "The Mussulmans, I am told, have taken me for an
invaluable gem, and are conspiring to loot me and hide me away in
their graveyard.  But I feel that it is necessary that I should
live.  I have just twenty-five minutes to catch the North-bound
train.  So, for the present, I must be gone.  We shall have our
talk out at the next convenient opportunity.  If you take my
advice, don't you delay in getting away either.  I salute you,
Queen Bee, Queen of the bleeding hearts, Queen of desolation!"

Sandip then left almost at a run.  I stood stock-still; I had
never realized in such a manner before, how trivial, how paltry,
this gold and these jewels were.  Only a short while ago I was so
busy thinking what I should take with me, and how I should pack
it.  Now I felt that there was no need to take anything at all.
To set out and go forth was the important thing.

My husband left his seat and came up and took me by the hand.
"It is getting late," he said.  "There is not much time left to
complete our preparations for the journey."

At this point Chandranath Babu suddenly came in.  Finding us both
together, he fell back for a moment.  Then he said, "Forgive me,
my little mother, if I intrude.  Nikhil, the Mussulmans are out
of hand.  They are looting Harish Kundu's treasury.  That does
not so much matter.  But what is intolerable is the violence that
is being done to the women of their house."

"I am off," said my husband.

"What can you do there?"  I pleaded, as I held him by the hand.
"Oh, sir," I appealed to his master.  "Will you not tell him not
to go?"

"My little mother," he replied, "there is no time to do anything
else."

"Don't be alarmed, Bimal," said my husband, as he left us.

When I went to the window I saw my husband galloping away on
horseback, with not a weapon in his hands.

In another minute the Bara Rani came running in.  "What have you
done, Chotie darling," she cried.  "How could you let him go?"

"Call the Dewan at once," she said, turning to a servant.

The Ranis never appeared before the Dewan, but the Bara Rani had
no thought that day for appearances.

"Send a mounted man to bring back the Maharaja at once," she
said, as soon as the Dewan came up.

"We have all entreated him to stay, Rani Mother," said the Dewan,
"but he refused to turn back."

"Send word to him that the Bara Rani is ill, that she is on her
death-bed," cried my sister-in-law wildly.

When the Dewan had left she turned on me with a furious outburst.
"Oh, you witch, you ogress, you could not die yourself, but needs
must send him to his death!  ..."

The light of the day began to fade.  The sun set behind the
feathery foliage of the blossoming __Sajna__ tree.  I can see
every different shade of that sunset even today.  Two masses of
cloud on either side of the sinking orb made it look like a great
bird with fiery-feathered wings outspread.  It seemed to me that
this fateful day was taking its flight, to cross the ocean of
night.

It became darker and darker.  Like the flames of a distant
village on fire, leaping up every now and then above the horizon,
a distant din swelled up in recurring waves into the darkness.

The bells of the evening worship rang out from our temple.  I
knew the Bara Rani was sitting there, with palms joined in silent
prayer.  But I could not move a step from the window.

The roads, the village beyond, and the still more distant fringe
of trees, grew more and more vague.  The lake in our grounds
looked up into the sky with a dull lustre, like a blind man's
eye.  On the left the tower seemed to be craning its neck to
catch sight of something that was happening.

The sounds of night take on all manner of disguises.  A twig
snaps, and one thinks that somebody is running for his life.  A
door slams, and one feels it to be the sudden heart-thump of a
startled world.

Lights would suddenly flicker under the shade of the distant
trees, and then go out again.  Horses' hoofs would clatter, now
and again, only to turn out to be riders leaving the palace
gates.

I continually had the feeling that, if only I could die, all this
turmoil would come to an end.  So long as I was alive my sins
would remain rampant, scattering destruction on every side.  I
remembered the pistol in my box.  But my feet refused to leave
the window in quest of it.  Was I not awaiting my fate?

The gong of the watch solemnly struck ten.  A little later,
groups of lights appeared in the distance and a great crowd wound
its way, like some great serpent, along the roads in the
darkness, towards the palace gates.

The Dewan rushed to the gate at the sound.  Just then a rider
came galloping in.  "What's the news, Jata?"  asked the Dewan.

"Not good," was the reply.

I could hear these words distinctly from my window.  But
something was next whispered which I could not catch.

Then came a palanquin, followed by a litter.  The doctor was
walking alongside the palanquin.

"What do you think, doctor?"  asked the Dewan.

"Can't say yet," the doctor replied.  "The wound in the head is a
serious one."

"And Amulya Babu?"

"He has a bullet through the heart.  He is done for."





The Home and the World by Rabindranath Tagore.
Translated [from Bengali to English] by Surendranath Tagore.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Home and the World, by Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOME AND THE WORLD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Post Office
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Post Office

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Translator: Devabrata Mukherjee

Release date: September 1, 2004 [eBook #6523]
                Most recently updated: March 21, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Eric Eldred and Chetan K. Jain


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POST OFFICE ***





Produced by Eric Eldred and Chetan K. Jain









The Post Office


By Rabindranath Tagore


[Translated from Bengali to English by Devabrata Mukherjee]

[New York: The Macmillan Company, 1914
Copyright 1914, by Mitchell Kennerley;
Copyright, 1914 by The Macmillan Company]




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ

MADHAV
AMAL, his adopted child
SUDHA, a little flower girl
THE DOCTOR
DAIRYMAN
WATCHMAN
GAFFER
VILLAGE HEADMAN, a bully
KING'S HERALD
ROYAL PHYSICIAN




THE POST OFFICE


ACT I


[MADHAV'S House]

MADHAV.  What a state I am in!  Before he came, nothing mattered;
I felt so free.  But now that he has come, goodness knows from
where, my heart is filled with his dear self, and my home will be
no home to me when he leaves.  Doctor, do you think he--

PHYSICIAN.  If there's life in his fate, then he will live long.
But what the medical scriptures say, it seems--

MADHAV.  Great heavens, what?

PHYSICIAN.  The scriptures have it: "Bile or palsey, cold or gout
spring all alike."

MADHAV.  Oh, get along, don't fling your scriptures at me; you
only make me more anxious; tell me what I can do.

PHYSICIAN.  [Taking snuff] The patient needs the most scrupulous
care.

MADHAV.  That's true; but tell me how.

PHYSICIAN.  I have already mentioned, on no account must he be
let out of doors.

MADHAV Poor child, it is very hard to keep him indoors all day
long.

PHYSICIAN.  What else can you do?  The autumn sun and the damp
are both very bad for the little fellow--for the scriptures have
it:

  "In wheezing, swoon or in nervous fret,
    In jaundice or leaden eyes--"


MADHAV.  Never mind the scriptures, please.  Eh, then we must
shut the poor thing up.  Is there no other method?

PHYSICIAN.  None at all: for, "In the wind and in the sun--"

MADHAV.  What will your "in this and in that" do for me now?  Why
don't you let them alone and come straight to the point?  What's
to be done then?  Your system is very, very hard for the poor
boy; and he is so quiet too with all his pain and sickness.  It
tears my heart to see him wince, as he takes your medicine.

PHYSICIAN.  The more he winces, the surer is the effect.  That's
why the sage Chyabana observes: "In medicine as in good advices,
the least palatable ones are the truest."  Ah, well!  I must
be trotting now.  [Exit]

[GAFFER enters]

MADHAV.  Well, I'm jiggered, there's Gaffer now.

GAFFER.  Why, why, I won't bite you.

MADHAV.  No, but you are a devil to send children off their
heads.

GAFFER.  But you aren't a child, and you've no child in the
house; why worry then?

MADHAV.  Oh, but I have brought a child into the house.

GAFFER.  Indeed, how so?

MADHAV.  You remember how my wife was dying to adopt a child?

GAFFER.  Yes, but that's an old story; you didn't like the idea.

MADHAV.  You know, brother, how hard all this getting money in
has been.  That somebody else's child would sail in and waste all
this money earned with so much trouble--Oh, I hated the idea.
But this boy clings to my heart in such a queer sort of way--

GAFFER.  So that's the trouble!  and your money goes all for him
and feels jolly lucky it does go at all.

MADHAV.  Formerly, earning was a sort of passion with me; I
simply couldn't help working for money.  Now, I make money and as
I know it is all for this dear boy, earning becomes a joy to me.

GAFFER.  Ah, well, and where did you pick him up?

MADHAV.  He is the son of a man who was a brother to my wife by
village ties.  He has had no mother since infancy; and now the
other day he lost his father as well.

GAFFER.  Poor thing: and so he needs me all the more.

MADHAV.  The doctor says all the organs of his little body are at
loggerheads with each other, and there isn't much hope for his
life.  There is only one way to save him and that is to keep him
out of this autumn wind and sun.  But you are such a terror!
What with this game of yours at your age, too, to get children
out of doors!

GAFFER.  God bless my soul!  So I'm already as bad as autumn wind
and sun, eh!  But, friend, I know something, too, of the game of
keeping them indoors.  When my day's work is over I am coming in
to make friends with this child of yours.  [Exit]

[AMAL enters]

AMAL.  Uncle, I say, Uncle!

MADHAV.  Hullo!  Is that you, Amal?

AMAL.  Mayn't I be out of the courtyard at all?

MADHAV.  No, my dear, no.

AMAL.  See, there where Auntie grinds lentils in the quirn, the
squirrel is sitting with his tail up and with his wee hands he's
picking up the broken grains of lentils and crunching them.
Can't I run up there?

MADHAV.  No, my darling, no.

AMAL.  Wish I were a squirrel!--it would be lovely.  Uncle, why
won't you let me go about?

MADHAV.  Doctor says it's bad for you to be out.

AMAL.  How can the doctor know?

MADHAV.  What a thing to say!  The doctor can't know and he reads
such huge books!

AMAL.  Does his book-learning tell him everything?

MADHAV.  Of course, don't you know!

AMAL [With a sigh] Ah, I am so stupid!  I don't read books.

MADHAV.  Now, think of it; very, very learned people are all like
you; they are never out of doors.

AMAL.  Aren't they really?

MADHAV.  No, how can they?  Early and late they toil and moil at
their books, and they've eyes for nothing else.  Now, my little
man, you are going to be learned when you grow up; and then you
will stay at home and read such big books, and people will notice
you and say, "he's a wonder."

AMAL.  No, no, Uncle; I beg of you by your dear feet--I don't
want to be learned, I won't.

MADHAV.  Dear, dear; it would have been my saving if I could have
been learned.

AMAL.  No, I would rather go about and see everything that there
is.

MADHAV.  Listen to that!  See!  What will you see, what is there
so much to see?

AMAL.  See that far-away hill from our window--I often long to go
beyond those hills and right away.

MADHAV.  Oh, you silly!  As if there's nothing more to be done
but just get up to the top of that hill and away!  Eh!  You don't
talk sense, my boy.  Now listen, since that hill stands there
upright as a barrier, it means you can't get beyond it.  Else,
what was the use in heaping up so many large stones to make such
a big affair of it, eh!

AMAL.  Uncle, do you think it is meant to prevent your crossing
over?  It seems to me because the earth can't speak it raises its
hands into the sky and beckons.  And those who live far and sit
alone by their windows can see the signal.  But I suppose the
learned people--

MADHAV.  No, they don't have time for that sort of nonsense.
They are not crazy like you.

AMAL.  Do you know, yesterday I met someone quite as crazy as I
am.

MADHAV.  Gracious me, really, how so?

AMAL.  He had a bamboo staff on his shoulder with a small bundle
at the top, and a brass pot in his left hand, and an old pair of
shoes on; he was making for those hills straight across that
meadow there.  I called out to him and asked, "Where are you
going?"  He answered, "I don't know, anywhere!"  I asked again,
"Why are you going?"  He said, "I'm going out to seek work."
Say, Uncle, have you to seek work?

MADHAV.  Of course I have to.  There's many about looking for
jobs.

AMAL.  How lovely!  I'll go about, like them too, finding things
to do.

MADHAV.  Suppose you seek and don't find.  Then--

AMAL.  Wouldn't that be jolly?  Then I should go farther!  I
watched that man slowly walking on with his pair of worn out
shoes.  And when he got to where the water flows under the fig
tree, he stopped and washed his feet in the stream.  Then he took
out from his bundle some gram-flour, moistened it with water and
began to eat.  Then he tied up his bundle and shouldered it
again; tucked up his cloth above his knees and crossed the
stream.  I've asked Auntie to let me go up to the stream, and eat
my gram-flour just like him.

MADHAV.  And what did your Auntie say to that?

AMAL.  Auntie said, "Get well and then I'll take you over there."
Please, Uncle, when shall I get well?

MADHAV.  It won't be long, dear.

AMAL.  Really, but then I shall go right away the moment I'm well
again.

MADHAV.  And where will you go?

AMAL.  Oh, I will walk on, crossing so many streams, wading
through water.  Everybody will be asleep with their doors shut in
the heat of the day and I will tramp on and on seeking work far,
very far.

MADHAV.  I see!  I think you had better be getting well first;
then--

AMAL.  But then you won't want me to be learned, will you, Uncle?

MADHAV.  What would you rather be then?

AMAL.  I can't think of anything just now; but I'll tell you
later on.

MADHAV.  Very well.  But mind you, you aren't to call out and
talk to strangers again.

AMAL.  But I love to talk to strangers!

MADHAV.  Suppose they had kidnapped you?

AMAL.  That would have been splendid!  But no one ever takes me
away.  They all want me to stay in here.

MADHAV.  I am off to my work--but, darling, you won't go out,
will you?

AMAL.  No, I won't.  But, Uncle, you'll let me be in this room by
the roadside.

[Exit MADHAV]

DAIRYMAN.  Curds, curds, good nice curds.

AMAL.  Curdseller, I say, Curdseller.

DAIRYMAN.  Why do you call me?  Will you buy some curds?

AMAL.  How can I buy?  I have no money.

DAIRYMAN.  What a boy!  Why call out then?  Ugh!  What a waste of
time.

AMAL.  I would go with you if I could.

DAIRYMAN.  With me?

AMAL.  Yes, I seem to feel homesick when I hear you call from far
down the road.

DAIRYMAN.  [Lowering his yoke-pole] Whatever are you doing here, my
child?

AMAL.  The doctor says I'm not to be out, so I sit here all day
long.

DAIRYMAN.  My poor child, whatever has happened to you?

AMAL.  I can't tell.  You see I am not learned, so I don't know
what's the matter with me.  Say, Dairyman, where do you come
from?

DAIRYMAN.  From our village.

AMAL.  Your village?  Is it very far?

DAIRYMAN.  Our village lies on the river Shamli at the foot of
the Panch-mura hills.

AMAL.  Panch-mura hills!  Shamli river!  I wonder.  I may have
seen your village.  I can't think when though!

DAIRYMAN.  Have you seen it?  Been to the foot of those hills?

AMAL.  Never.  But I seem to remember having seen it.  Your
village is under some very old big trees, just by the side of the
red road--isn't that so?

DAIRYMAN.  That's right, child.

AMAL.  And on the slope of the hill cattle grazing.

DAIRYMAN.  How wonderful!  Aren't there cattle grazing in our
village!  Indeed, there are!

AMAL.  And your women with red sarees fill their pitchers from
the river and carry them on their heads.

DAIRYMAN.  Good, that's right.  Women from our dairy village do
come and draw their water from the river; but then it isn't
everyone who has a red saree to put on.  But, my dear child,
surely you must have been there for a walk some time.

AMAL.  Really, Dairyman, never been there at all.  But the first
day doctor lets me go out, you are going to take me to your
village.

DAIRYMAN.  I will, my child, with pleasure.

AMAL.  And you'll teach me to cry curds and shoulder the yoke
like you and walk the long, long road?

DAIRYMAN.  Dear, dear, did you ever?  Why should you sell curds?
No, you will read big books and be learned.

AMAL.  No, I never want to be learned--I'll be like you and take
my curds from the village by the red road near the old banyan
tree, and I will hawk it from cottage to cottage.  Oh, how do you
cry--"Curd, curd, good nice curd!"  Teach me the tune, will you?

DAIRYMAN.  Dear, dear, teach you the tune; what an idea!

AMAL.  Please do.  I love to hear it.  I can't tell you how queer
I feel when I hear you cry out from the bend of that road,
through the line of those trees!  Do you know I feel like that
when I hear the shrill cry of kites from almost the end of the
sky?

DAIRYMAN.  Dear child, will you have some curds?  Yes, do.

AMAL.  But I have no money.

DAIRYMAN.  No, no, no, don't talk of money!  You'll make me so
happy if you have a little curds from me.

AMAL.  Say, have I kept you too long?

DAIRYMAN.  Not a bit; it has been no loss to me at all; you have
taught me how to be happy selling curds.  [Exit]

AMAL.  [Intoning] Curds, curds, good nice curds--from the dairy
village--from the country of the Panch-mura hills by the Shamli
bank.  Curds, good curds; in the early morning the women make the
cows stand in a row under the trees and milk them, and in the
evening they turn the milk into curds.  Curds, good curds.
Hello, there's the watchman on his rounds.  Watchman, I say, come
and have a word with me.

WATCHMAN.  What's all this row you are making?  Aren't you afraid
of the likes of me?

AMAL.  No, why should I be?

WATCHMAN.  Suppose I march you off then?

AMAL.  Where will you take me to?  Is it very far, right beyond
the hills?

WATCHMAN.  Suppose I march you straight to the King?

AMAL.  To the King!  Do, will you?  But the doctor won't let me
go out.  No one can ever take me away.  I've got to stay here all
day long.

WATCHMAN.  Doctor won't let you, poor fellow!  So I see!  Your
face is pale and there are dark rings round your eyes.  Your
veins stick out from your poor thin hands.

AMAL.  Won't you sound the gong, Watchman?

WATCHMAN.  Time has not yet come.

AMAL.  How curious!  Some say time has not yet come, and some say
time has gone by!  But surely your time will come the moment you
strike the gong!

WATCHMAN.  That's not possible; I strike up the gong only when it
is time.

AMAL.  Yes, I love to hear your gong.  When it is midday and our
meal is over, Uncle goes off to his work and Auntie falls asleep
reading her Râmayana, and in the courtyard under the shadow of
the wall our doggie sleeps with his nose in his curled up tail;
then your gong strikes out, "Dong, dong, dong!"  Tell me why does
your gong sound?

WATCHMAN.  My gong sounds to tell the people, Time waits for
none, but goes on forever.

AMAL.  Where, to what land?

WATCHMAN.  That none knows.

AMAL.  Then I suppose no one has ever been there!  Oh, I do wish
to fly with the time to that land of which no one knows anything.

WATCHMAN.  All of us have to get there one day, my child.

AMAL.  Have I too?

WATCHMAN.  Yes, you too!

AMAL.  But doctor won't let me out.

WATCHMAN.  One day the doctor himself may take you there by the
hand.

AMAL.  He won't; you don't know him.  He only keeps me in.

WATCHMAN.  One greater than he comes and lets us free.

AMAL.  When will this great doctor come for me?  I can't stick in
here any more.

WATCHMAN.  Shouldn't talk like that, my child.

AMAL.  No.  I am here where they have left me--I never move a
bit.  But when your gong goes off, dong, dong, dong, it goes to
my heart.  Say, Watchman?

WATCHMAN.  Yes, my dear.

AMAL.  Say, what's going on there in that big house on the other
side, where there is a flag flying high up and the people are
always going in and out?

WATCHMAN.  Oh, there?  That's our new Post Office.

AMAL.  Post Office?  Whose?

WATCHMAN.  Whose?  Why, the King's surely!

AMAL.  Do letters come from the King to his office here?

WATCHMAN.  Of course.  One fine day there may be a letter for you
in there.

AMAL.  A letter for me?  But I am only a little boy.

WATCHMAN.  The King sends tiny notes to little boys.

AMAL.  Oh, how lovely!  When shall I have my letter?  How do you
guess he'll write to me?

WATCHMAN.  Otherwise why should he set his Post Office here right
in front of your open window, with the golden flag flying?

AMAL.  But who will fetch me my King's letter when it comes?

WATCHMAN.  The King has many postmen.  Don't you see them run
about with round gilt badges on their chests?

AMAL.  Well, where do they go?

WATCHMAN.  Oh, from door to door, all through the country.

AMAL.  I'll be the King's postman when I grow up.

WATCHMAN.  Ha!  ha!  Postman, indeed!  Rain or shine, rich or
poor, from house to house delivering letters--that's very great
work!

AMAL.  That's what I'd like best.  What makes you smile so?  Oh,
yes, your work is great too.  When it is silent everywhere in the
heat of the noonday, your gong sounds, Dong, dong, dong,--and
sometimes when I wake up at night all of a sudden and find our
lamp blown out, I can hear through the darkness your gong slowly
sounding, Dong, dong, dong!

WATCHMAN.  There's the village headman!  I must be off.  If he
catches me gossiping with you there'll be a great to do.

AMAL.  The headman?  Whereabouts is he?

WATCHMAN.  Right down the road there; see that huge palm-leaf
umbrella hopping along?  That's him!

AMAL.  I suppose the King's made him our headman here?

WATCHMAN.  Made him?  Oh, no!  A fussy busy-body!  He knows so
many ways of making himself unpleasant that everybody is afraid
of him.  It's just a game for the likes of him, making trouble
for everybody.  I must be off now!  Mustn't keep work waiting,
you know!  I'll drop in again to-morrow morning and tell you all
the news of the town.  [Exit]

AMAL.  It would be splendid to have a letter from the King every
day.  I'll read them at the window.  But, oh!  I can't read
writing.  Who'll read them out to me, I wonder!  Auntie reads her
Râmayana; she may know the King's writing.  If no one will, then
I must keep them carefully and read them when I'm grown up.  But
if the postman can't find me?  Headman, Mr. Headman, may I have a
word with you?

HEADMAN.  Who is yelling after me on the highway?  Oh, you
wretched monkey!

AMAL.  You're the headman.  Everybody minds you.

HEADMAN [Looking pleased] Yes, oh yes, they do!  They must!

AMAL.  Do the King's postmen listen to you?

HEADMAN.  They've got to.  By Jove, I'd like to see--

AMAL.  Will you tell the postman it's Amal who sits by the window
here?

HEADMAN.  What's the good of that?

AMAL.  In case there's a letter for me.

HEADMAN.  A letter for you!  Whoever's going to write to you?

AMAL.  If the King does.

HEADMAN.  Ha!  ha!  What an uncommon little fellow you are!  Ha!
ha!  the King indeed, aren't you his bosom friend, eh!  You
haven't met for a long while and the King is pining, I am sure.
Wait till to-morrow and you'll have your letter.

AMAL.  Say, Headman, why do you speak to me in that tone of
voice?  Are you cross?

HEADMAN.  Upon my word!  Cross, indeed!  You write to the King!
Madhav is devilish swell nowadays.  He'd made a little pile; and
so kings and padishahs are everyday talk with his people.  Let me
find him once and I'll make him dance.  Oh, you snipper-snapper!
I'll get the King's letter sent to your house--indeed I will!

AMAL.  No, no, please don't trouble yourself about it.

HEADMAN.  And why not, pray!  I'll tell the King about you and he
won't be very long.  One of his footmen will come along presently
for news of you.  Madhav's impudence staggers me.  If the King
hears of this, that'll take some of his nonsense out of him.
[Exit]

AMAL.  Who are you walking there?  How your anklets tinkle!  Do
stop a while, dear, won't you?

[A GIRL enters]

GIRL.  I haven't a moment to spare; it is already late!

AMAL.  I see, you don't wish to stop; I don't care to stay on
here either.

GIRL.  You make me think of some late star of the morning!
Whatever's the matter with you?

AMAL.  I don't know; the doctor won't let me out.

GIRL.  Ah me!  Don't then!  Should listen to the doctor.
People'll be cross with you if you're naughty.  I know, always
looking out and watching must make you feel tired.  Let me close
the window a bit for you.

AMAL.  No, don't, only this one's open!  All the others are shut.
But will you tell me who you are?  Don't seem to know you.

GIRL.  I am Sudha.

AMAL.  What Sudha?

SUDHA.  Don't you know?  Daughter of the flower-seller here.

AMAL.  What do you do?

SUDHA.  I gather flowers in my basket.

AMAL.  Oh, flower gathering!  That is why your feet seem so glad
and your anklets jingle so merrily as you walk.  Wish I could be
out too.  Then I would pick some flowers for you from the very
topmost branches right out of sight.

SUDHA.  Would you really?  Do you know more about flowers than I?

AMAL.  Yes, I do, quite as much.  I know all about Champa of the
fairy tale and his seven brothers.  If only they let me, I'll go
right into the dense forest where you can't find your way.  And
where the honey-sipping hummingbird rocks himself on the end of
the thinnest branch, I will flower out as a champa.  Would you be
my sister Parul?

SUDHA.  You are silly!  How can I be sister Parul when I am Sudha
and my mother is Sasi, the flower-seller?  I have to weave so
many garlands a day.  It would be jolly if I could lounge here
like you!

AMAL.  What would you do then, all the day long?

SUDHA.  I could have great times with my doll Benay the bride,
and Meni the pussycat and--but I say it is getting late and I
mustn't stop, or I won't find a single flower.

AMAL.  Oh, wait a little longer; I do like it so!

SUDHA.  Ah, well--now don't you be naughty.  Be good and sit
still and on my way back home with the flowers I'll come and talk
with you.

AMAL.  And you'll let me have a flower then?

SUDHA.  No, how can I?  It has to be paid for.

AMAL.  I'll pay when I grow up--before I leave to look for work
out on the other side of that stream there.

SUDHA.  Very well, then.

AMAL.  And you'll come back when you have your flowers?

SUDHA.  I will.

AMAL.  You will, really?

SUDHA.  Yes, I will.

AMAL.  You won't forget me?  I am Amal, remember that.

SUDHA.  I won't forget you, you'll see.  [Exit]

[A TROOP OF BOYS enter]

AMAL.  Say, brothers, where are you all off to?  Stop here a
little.

BOYS.  We're off to play.

AMAL.  What will you play at, brothers?

BOYS.  We'll play at being ploughmen.

FIRST BOY [Showing a stick] This is our ploughshare.

SECOND BOY.  We two are the pair of oxen.

AMAL.  And you're going to play the whole day?

BOYS.  Yes, all day long.

AMAL.  And you'll come back home in the evening by the road along
the river bank?

BOYS.  Yes.

AMAL.  Do you pass our house on your way home?

BOYS.  You come out to play with us, yes do.

AMAL.  Doctor won't let me out.

BOYS.  Doctor!  Suppose the likes of you mind the doctor.  Let's
be off; it is getting late.

AMAL.  Don't.  Why not play on the road near this window?  I
could watch you then.

THIRD BOY.  What can we play at here?

AMAL.  With all these toys of mine lying about.  Here you are,
have them.  I can't play alone.  They are getting dirty and are
of no use to me.

BOYS.  How jolly!  What fine toys!  Look, here's a ship.  There's
old mother Jatai; say, chaps, ain't he a gorgeous sepoy?  And
you'll let us have them all?  You don't really mind?

AMAL.  No, not a bit; have them by all means.

BOYS.  You don't want them back?

AMAL.  Oh, no, I shan't want them.

BOYS.  Say, won't you get a scolding for this?

AMAL.  No one will scold me.  But will you play with them in
front of our door for a while every morning?  I'll get you new
ones when these are old.

BOYS.  Oh, yes, we will.  Say, chaps, put these sepoys into a
line.  We'll play at war; where can we get a musket?  Oh, look
here, this bit of reed will do nicely.  Say, but you're off to
sleep already.

AMAL.  I'm afraid I'm sleepy.  I don't know, I feel like it at
times.  I have been sitting a long while and I'm tired; my back
aches.

BOYS.  It's only early noon now.  How is it you're sleepy?  Listen!
The gong's sounding the first watch.

AMAL.  Yes, dong, dong, dong, it tolls me to sleep.

BOYS.  We had better go then.  We'll come in again to-morrow morning.

AMAL.  I want to ask you something before you go.  You are always
out--do you know of the King's postmen?

BOYS.  Yes, quite well.

AMAL.  Who are they?  Tell me their names.

BOYS.  One's Badal, another's Sarat.  There's so many of them.

AMAL.  Do you think they will know me if there's a letter for me?

BOYS.  Surely, if your name's on the letter they will find you out.

AMAL.  When you call in to-morrow morning, will you bring one of
them along so that he'll know me?

BOYS.  Yes, if you like.


CURTAIN




THE POST OFFICE


ACT II


[AMAL in Bed]

AMAL.  Can't I go near the window to-day, Uncle?  Would the
doctor mind that too?

MADHAV.  Yes, darling, you see you've made yourself worse
squatting there day after day.

AMAL.  Oh, no, I don't know if it's made me more ill, but I
always feel well when I'm there.

MADHAV.  No, you don't; you squat there and make friends with the
whole lot of people round here, old and young, as if they are
holding a fair right under my eaves--flesh and blood won't stand
that strain.  Just see--your face is quite pale.

AMAL.  Uncle, I fear my fakir'll pass and not see me by the
window.

MADHAV.  Your fakir, whoever's that?

AMAL.  He comes and chats to me of the many lands where he's
been.  I love to hear him.

MADHAV.  How's that?  I don't know of any fakirs.

AMAL.  This is about the time he comes in.  I beg of you, by your
dear feet, ask him in for a moment to talk to me here.

[GAFFER Enters in a FAKIR'S Guise]

AMAL.  There you are.  Come here, Fakir, by my bedside.

MADHAV.  Upon my word, but this is--

GAFFER.  [Winking hard] I am the fakir.

MADHAV.  It beats my reckoning what you're not.

AMAL.  Where have you been this time, Fakir?

FAKIR.  To the Isle of Parrots.  I am just back.

MADHAV.  The Parrots' Isle!

FAKIR.  Is it so very astonishing?  Am I like you, man?  A
journey doesn't cost a thing.  I tramp just where I like.

AMAL.  [Clapping] How jolly for you!  Remember your promise to take
me with you as your follower when I'm well.

FAKIR.  Of course, and I'll teach you such secrets too of
travelling that nothing in sea or forest or mountain can bar your
way.

MADHAV.  What's all this rigmarole?

GAFFER.  Amal, my dear, I bow to nothing in sea or mountain; but
if the doctor joins in with this uncle of yours, then I with all
my magic must own myself beaten.

AMAL.  No.  Uncle shan't tell the doctor.  And I promise to lie
quiet; but the day I am well, off I go with the Fakir and nothing
in sea or mountain or torrent shall stand in my way.

MADHAV.  Fie, dear child, don't keep on harping upon going!  It
makes me so sad to hear you talk so.

AMAL.  Tell me, Fakir, what the Parrots' Isle is like.

GAFFER.  It's a land of wonders; it's a haunt of birds.  There's
no man; and they neither speak nor walk, they simply sing and
they fly.

AMAL.  How glorious!  And it's by some sea?

GAFFER.  Of course.  It's on the sea.

AMAL.  And green hills are there?

GAFFER.  Indeed, they live among the green hills; and in the time
of the sunset when there is a red glow on the hillside, all the
birds with their green wings flock back to their nests.

AMAL.  And there are waterfalls!

GAFFER.  Dear me, of course; you don't have a hill without its
waterfalls.  Oh, it's like molten diamonds; and, my dear, what
dances they have!  Don't they make the pebbles sing as they rush
over them to the sea.  No devil of a doctor can stop them for a
moment.  The birds looked upon me as nothing but a man, quite a
trifling creature without wings--and they would have nothing to
do with me.  Were it not so I would build a small cabin for
myself among their crowd of nests and pass my days counting the
sea waves.

AMAL.  How I wish I were a bird!  Then--

GAFFER.  But that would have been a bit of a job; I hear you've
fixed up with the dairyman to be a hawker of curds when you grow
up; I'm afraid such business won't flourish among birds; you
might land yourself into serious loss.

MADHAV.  Really this is too much.  Between you two I shall turn
crazy.  Now, I'm off.

AMAL.  Has the dairyman been, Uncle?

MADHAV.  And why shouldn't he?  He won't bother his head running
errands for your pet fakir, in and out among the nests in his
Parrots' Isle.  But he has left a jar of curd for you saying that
he is rather busy with his niece's wedding in the village, and he
has got to order a band at Kamlipara.

AMAL.  But he is going to marry me to his little niece.

GAFFER.  Dear me, we are in a fix now.

AMAL.  He said she would find me a lovely little bride with a
pair of pearl drops in her ears and dressed in a lovely red
sâree; and in the morning she would milk with her own hands the
black cow and feed me with warm milk with foam on it from a brand
new earthen cruse; and in the evenings she would carry the lamp
round the cow-house, and then come and sit by me to tell me tales
of Champa and his six brothers.

[Transcriber's note: In act 1, Amal mentions to Sudha about Champa
and his seven brothers. In this act, Amal mentions to Gaffer about
Champa and his six brothers. Translator error?]

GAFFER.  How delicious!  The prospect tempts even me, a hermit!
But never mind, dear, about this wedding.  Let it be.  I tell you
when you wed there'll be no lack of nieces in his household.

MADHAV.  Shut up!  This is more than I can stand.  [Exit]

AMAL.  Fakir, now that Uncle's off, just tell me, has the King
sent me a letter to the Post Office?

GAFFER.  I gather that his letter has already started; but it's
still on the way.

AMAL.  On the way?  Where is it?  Is it on that road winding
through the trees which you can follow to the end of the forest
when the sky is quite clear after rain?

GAFFER.  That's so.  You know all about it already.

AMAL.  I do, everything.

GAFFER.  So I see, but how?

AMAL.  I can't say; but it's quite clear to me.  I fancy I've
seen it often in days long gone by.  How long ago I can't tell.
Do you know when?  I can see it all: there, the King's postman
coming down the hillside alone, a lantern in his left hand and on
his back a bag of letters climbing down for ever so long, for
days and nights, and where at the foot of the mountain the
waterfall becomes a stream he takes to the footpath on the bank
and walks on through the rye; then comes the sugarcane field and
he disappears into the narrow lane cutting through the tall stems
of sugarcanes; then he reaches the open meadow where the cricket
chirps and where there is not a single man to be seen, only the
snipe wagging their tails and poking at the mud with their bills.
I can feel him coming nearer and nearer and my heart becomes
glad.

GAFFER.  My eyes aren't young; but you make me see all the same.

AMAL.  Say, Fakir, do you know the King who has this Post Office?

GAFFER.  I do; I go to him for my alms every day.

AMAL.  Good!  When I get well, I must have my alms too from him,
mayn't I?

GAFFER.  You won't need to ask, my dear, he'll give it to you of
his own accord.

AMAL.  No, I would go to his gate and cry, "Victory to thee,
O King!"  and dancing to the tabor's sound, ask for alms.
Won't it be nice?

GAFFER.  It would be splendid, and if you're with me, I shall
have my full share.  But what'll you ask?

AMAL.  I shall say, "Make me your postman, that I may go about
lantern in hand, delivering your letters from door to door.
Don't let me stay at home all day!"

GAFFER.  What is there to be sad for, my child, even were you to
stay at home?

AMAL.  It isn't sad.  When they shut me in here first I felt the
day was so long.  Since the King's Post Office I like it more and
more being indoors, and as I think I shall get a letter one day,
I feel quite happy and then I don't mind being quiet and alone.
I wonder if I shall make out what'll be in the King's letter?

GAFFER.  Even if you didn't wouldn't it be enough if it just bore
your name?

[MADHAV enters]

MADHAV.  Have you any idea of the trouble you've got me into,
between you two?

GAFFER.  What's the matter?

MADHAV.  I hear you've let it get rumored about that the King has
planted his office here to send messages to both of you.

GAFFER.  Well, what about it?

MADHAV.  Our headman Panchanan has had it told to the King
anonymously.

GAFFER.  Aren't we aware that everything reaches the King's ears?

MADHAV.  Then why don't you look out?  Why take the King's name
in vain?  You'll bring me to ruin if you do.

AMAL.  Say, Fakir, will the King be cross?

GAFFER.  Cross, nonsense!  And with a child like you and a fakir
such as I am.  Let's see if the King be angry, and then won't I
give him a piece of my mind.

AMAL.  Say, Fakir, I've been feeling a sort of darkness coming
over my eyes since the morning.  Everything seems like a dream.
I long to be quiet.  I don't feel like talking at all.  Won't the
King's letter come?  Suppose this room melts away all on a
sudden, suppose--

GAFFER.  [Fanning AMAL] The letter's sure to come to-day, my boy.

[DOCTOR enters]

DOCTOR.  And how do you feel to-day?

AMAL.  Feel awfully well to-day, Doctor.  All pain seems to have
left me.

DOCTOR.  [Aside to MADHAV] Don't quite like the look of that smile.
Bad sign that, his feeling well!  Chakradhan has observed--

MADHAV.  For goodness sake, Doctor, leave Chakradhan alone.  Tell
me what's going to happen?

DOCTOR.  Can't hold him in much longer, I fear!  I warned you
before--This looks like a fresh exposure.

MADHAV.  No, I've used the utmost care, never let him out of
doors; and the windows have been shut almost all the time.

DOCTOR.  There's a peculiar quality in the air to-day.  As I came
in I found a fearful draught through your front door.  That's
most hurtful.  Better lock it at once.  Would it matter if this
kept your visitors off for two or three days?  If someone happens
to call unexpectedly--there's the back door.  You had better shut
this window as well, it's letting in the sunset rays only to keep
the patient awake.

MADHAV.  Amal has shut his eyes.  I expect he is sleeping.  His
face tells me--Oh, Doctor, I bring in a child who is a stranger
and love him as my own, and now I suppose I must lose him!

DOCTOR.  What's that?  There's your headman sailing in!--What a
bother!  I must be going, brother.  You had better stir about and
see to the doors being properly fastened.  I will send on a
strong dose directly I get home.  Try it on him--it may save him
at last, if he can be saved at all.  [Exeunt MADHAV and DOCTOR.]

[The HEADMAN enters]

HEADMAN.  Hello, urchin!

GAFFER.  [Rising hastily] 'Sh, be quiet.

AMAL.  No, Fakir, did you think I was asleep?  I wasn't.  I can
hear everything; yes, and voices far away.  I feel that mother
and father are sitting by my pillow and speaking to me.

[MADHAV enters]

HEADMAN.  I say, Madhav, I hear you hobnob with bigwigs nowadays.

MADHAV.  Spare me your jests, Headman, we are but common people.

HEADMAN.  But your child here is expecting a letter from the
King.

MADHAV.  Don't you take any notice of him, a mere foolish boy!

HEADMAN.  Indeed, why not!  It'll beat the King hard to find a
better family!  Don't you see why the King plants his new Post
Office right before your window?  Why there's a letter for you
from the King, urchin.

AMAL.  [Starting up] Indeed, really!

HEADMAN.  How can it be false?  You're the King's chum.  Here's
your letter [showing a blank slip of paper].  Ha, ha, ha!  This
is the letter.

AMAL.  Please don't mock me.  Say, Fakir, is it so?

GAFFER.  Yes, my dear.  I as Fakir tell you it is his letter.

AMAL.  How is it I can't see?  It all looks so blank to me.  What
is there in the letter, Mr. Headman?

HEADMAN.  The King says, "I am calling on you shortly; you had
better arrange puffed rice offerings for me.--Palace fare is
quite tasteless to me now."  Ha!  ha!  ha!

MADHAV.  [With folded palms] I beseech you, headman, don't you joke
about these things--

GAFFER.  Cutting jokes indeed, dare he!

MADHAV.  Are you out of your mind too, Gaffer?

GAFFER.  Out of my mind, well then I am; I can read plainly that
the King writes he will come himself to see Amal, with the state
physician.

AMAL.  Fakir, Fakir, 'sh, his trumpet!  Can't you hear?

HEADMAN.  Ha!  ha!  ha!  I fear he won't until he's a bit more
off his head.

AMAL.  Mr. Headman, I thought you were cross with me and didn't
love me.  I never could think you would fetch me the King's
letter.  Let me wipe the dust off your feet.

HEADMAN.  This little child does have an instinct of reverence.
Though a little silly, he has a good heart.

AMAL.  It's hard on the fourth watch now, I suppose--Hark the
gong, "Dong, dong, ding," "Dong, dong, ding."  Is the evening
star up?  How is it I can't see--

GAFFER.  Oh, the windows are all shut, I'll open them.

[A knocking outside]

MADHAV.  What's that?--Who is it--what a bother!

VOICE.  [From outside] Open the door.

MADHAV Say, Headman--Hope they're not robbers.

HEADMAN.  Who's there?--It's Panchanan, the headman, calls--Aren't
you afraid of the like of me?  Fancy!  The noise has ceased!
Panchanan's voice carries far.--Yes, show me the biggest robbers!

MADHAV.  [Peering out of the window] I should think the noise has
ceased.  They've smashed the door.

[THE KING'S HERALD enters]

HERALD.  Our Sovereign King comes to-night!

HEADMAN.  My God!

AMAL.  At what hour of the night, Herald?

HERALD.  On the second watch.

AMAL.  When from the city gates my friend the watchman will
strike his gong, "ding dong ding, ding dong ding"--then?

HERALD.  Yes, then.  The King sends his greatest physician to
attend on his young friend.

[STATE   Physician enters]

STATE PHYSICIAN.  What's this?  How close it is here!  Open wide
all the doors and windows.  [Feeling AMAL'S body] How do you
feel, my child?

AMAL.  I feel very well, Doctor, very well.  All pain is gone.
How fresh and open!  I can see all the stars now twinkling from
the other side of the dark.

PHYSICIAN.  Will you feel well enough to leave your bed with the
King when he comes in the middle watches of the night?

AMAL.  Of course, I'm dying to be about for ever so long.  I'll
ask the King to find me the polar star.--I must have seen it
often, but I don't know exactly which it is.

PHYSICIAN.  He will tell you everything.  [To MADHAV] Will you go
about and arrange flowers through the room for the King's visit?
[Indicating the HEADMAN] We can't have that person in here.

AMAL.  No, let him be, Doctor.  He is a friend.  It was he who
brought me the King's letter.

PHYSICIAN.  Very well, my child.  He may remain if he is a friend
of yours.

MADHAV [Whispering into AMAL'S ear] My child, the King loves you.
He is coming himself.  Beg for a gift from him.  You know our
humble circumstances.

AMAL.  Don't you worry, Uncle.--I've made up my mind about it.

MADHAV.  What is it, my child?

AMAL.  I shall ask him to make me one of his postmen that I may
wander far and wide, delivering his message from door to door.

MADHAV.  [Slapping his forehead] Alas, is that all?

AMAL.  What'll be our offerings to the King, Uncle, when he
comes?

HERALD.  He has commanded puffed rice.

AMAL.  Puffed rice!  Say, Headman, you're right.  You said so.
You knew all we didn't.

HEADMAN.  If you send word to my house then I could manage for
the King's advent really nice--

PHYSICIAN.  No need at all.  Now be quiet all of you.  Sleep is
coming over him.  I'll sit by his pillow; he's dropping into
slumber.  Blow out the oil-lamp.  Only let the star-light stream
in.  Hush, he slumbers.

MADHAV.  [Addressing GAFFER] What are you standing there for like
a statue, folding your palms.--I am nervous.--Say, are they good
omens?  Why are they darkening the room?  How will star-light
help?

GAFFER.  Silence, unbeliever.

[SUDHA enters]

SUDHA.  Amal!

PHYSICIAN.  He's asleep.

SUDHA.  I have some flowers for him.  Mayn't I give them into his
own hand?

PHYSICIAN.  Yes, you may.

SUDHA.  When will he be awake?

PHYSICIAN.  Directly the King comes and calls him.

SUDHA.  Will you whisper a word for me in his ear?

PHYSICIAN.  What shall I say?

SUDHA.  Tell him Sudha has not forgotten him.


CURTAIN








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POST OFFICE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Spirit of Japan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Spirit of Japan

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Release date: July 10, 2010 [eBook #33131]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Guillaume Doré, Ernest Schaal and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by Case Western Reserve University Preservation Department
        Digital Library)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPIRIT OF JAPAN ***




Produced by Guillaume Doré, Ernest Schaal and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Case Western Reserve University Preservation Department
Digital Library)









                             [Illustration]

                      Library of Adelbert College
                                   of
                       Western Reserve University

                         Gift of the Publisher




                          THE SPIRIT OF JAPAN

                               A LECTURE

                                   BY

                        SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE

           Delivered for the Students of the Private Colleges
             of Tokyo and the Members of the Indo-Japanese
                          Association, at the
                        Keio Gijuku University.

                   PUBLISHED BY THE INDO-JAPANESE
                           ASSOCIATION, TOKYO

                             JULY 2, 1916.

                        Copyrighted in U. S. A.




I am glad to have this opportunity once more of speaking to you before I
leave Japan. My stay here has been so short that one may think I have
not earned my right to speak to you about anything concerning your
country. I feel sure that I shall be told, that I am idealising certain
aspects, while leaving others unnoticed, and that there are chances of
my disillusionment, if I remain here for long. For I have known
foreigners, whose long experience has made them doubtful about your
moral qualifications,--even of your full efficiency in modern equipments
of progress.

But I am not going to be brow-beaten by the authority of long
experience, which is likely to be an experience of blindness carried
through long years. I have known such instances in my own country. The
mental sense, by the help of which we feel the spirit of a people, is
like the sense of sight, or of touch,--it is a natural gift. It finds
its objects, not by analysis, but by direct apprehension. Those who have
not this vision, merely see events and facts, and not their inner
association. Those who have no ear for music, hear sounds, but not the
song. Therefore when, by the mere reason of the lengthiness of their
suffering, they threaten to establish the fact of the tune to be a
noise, one need not be anxious about music. Very often it is mistakes
that require longer time to develop their tangles, while the right
answer comes promptly.

You ask me how I can prove, that I am right in my confidence that I can
see. My answer is, because I see something which is positive. There are
others, who affirm that they see something contrary. It only shows, that
I am looking on the picture side of the canvas, and they on the blank
side. Therefore my short view is of more value than their prolonged
stare.

It is a truism to say that shadows accompany light. What you feel, as
the truth of a people, has its numberless contradictions,--just as the
roundness of the earth is contradicted at every step by its hills and
hollows. Those who can boast of a greater familiarity with your country
than myself, can bring before me loads of contradictions, but I remain
firm upon my vision of a truth, which does not depend upon its
dimension, but upon its vitality.

At first, I had my doubts. I thought that I might not be able to see
Japan, as she is herself, but should have to be content to see the Japan
that takes an acrobatic pride in violently appearing as something else.
On my first arrival in this country, when I looked out from the balcony
of a house on the hillside, the town of Kobe,--that huge mass of
corrugated iron roofs,--appeared to me like a dragon, with glistening
scales, basking in the sun, after having devoured a large slice of the
living flesh of the earth. This dragon did not belong to the mythology
of the past, but of the present; and with its iron mask it tried to look
real to the children of the age,--real as the majestic rocks on the
shore, as the epic rhythm of the sea-waves. Anyhow it hid Japan from
my view, and I felt myself like the traveller, whose time is short,
waiting for the cloud to be lifted to have a sight of the eternal snow
on the Himalayan summit. I asked myself,--'Will the dense mist of the
iron age give way for a moment, and let me see what is true and abiding
in this land?' I was enveloped in a whirlwind of reception, but I had my
misgivings and thought that this might be a violent outbreak of
curiosity,--or that these people felt themselves bound to show their
appreciation of a man who had won renown from Europe, thus doing honour
to the West in a vicarious form.

But the clouds showed rifts, and glimpses I had of Japan where she is
true and more human. While travelling in a railway train I met, at a
wayside station, some Buddhist priests and devotees. They brought their
basket of fruits to me and held their lighted incense before my face,
wishing to pay homage to a man who had come from the land of Buddha. The
dignified serenity of their bearing, the simplicity of their
devoutness, seemed to fill the atmosphere of the busy railway station
with a golden light of peace. Their language of silence drowned the
noisy effusion of the newspapers. I felt that I saw something which was
at the root of Japan's greatness. And, since then, I have had other
opportunities of reaching the heart of the people; and I have come to
the conclusion, that the welcome which flowed towards me, with such
outburst of sincerity, was owing to the fact that Japan felt the
nearness of India to herself, and realised that her own heart has room
to expand beyond her boundaries and the boundaries of the modern time.

I have travelled in many countries and have met with men of all classes,
but never in my travels did I feel the presence of the human so
distinctly as in this land. In other great countries, signs of man's
power loomed large, and I saw vast organisations which showed efficiency
in all their features. There, display and extravagance, in dress, in
furniture, in costly entertainments, are startling. They seem to push
you back into a corner, like a poor intruder at a feast; they are apt
to make you envious, or take your breath away with amazement. There, you
do not feel man as supreme; you are hurled against the stupendousness of
things that alienates. But, in Japan, it is not the display of power, or
wealth, that is the predominating element. You see everywhere emblems of
love and admiration, and not mostly of ambition and greed. You see a
people, whose heart has come out and scattered itself in profusion in
its commonest utensils of everyday life in its social institutions, in
its manners, that are carefully perfect, and in its dealings with things
that are not only deft, but graceful in every movement.

What has impressed me most in this country is the conviction that you
have realised nature's secrets, not by methods of analytical knowledge,
but by sympathy. You have known her language of lines and music of
colours, the symmetry in her irregularities, and the cadence in her
freedom of movements; you have seen how she leads her immense crowds of
things yet avoids all frictions; how the very conflicts in her
creations break out in dance and music; how her exuberance has the
aspect of the fullness of self-abandonment, and not a mere dissipation
of display. You have discovered that nature reserves her power in forms
of beauty; and it is this beauty which, like a mother, nourishes all the
giant forces at her breast, keeping them in active vigour, yet in
repose. You have known that energies of nature save themselves from
wearing out by the rhythm of a perfect grace, and that she with the
tenderness of her curved lines takes away fatigue from the world's
muscles. I have felt that you have been able to assimilate these secrets
into your life, and the truth which lies in the beauty of all things has
passed into your souls. A mere knowledge of things can be had in a short
enough time, but their spirit can only be acquired by centuries of
training and self-control. Dominating nature from outside is a much
simpler thing than making her your own in love's delight, which is a
work of true genius. Your race has shown that genius, not by
acquirements, but by creations; not by display of things, but by
manifestation of its own inner being. This creative power there is in
all nations, and it is ever active in getting hold of men's natures and
giving them a form according to its ideals. But here, in Japan, it seems
to have achieved its success, and deeply sunk into the minds of all men,
and permeated their muscles and nerves. Your instincts have become true,
your senses keen, and your hands have acquired natural skill. The genius
of Europe has given her people the power of organisation, which has
specially made itself manifest in politics and commerce and in
coordinating scientific knowledge. The genius of Japan has given you the
vision of beauty in nature and the power of realising it in your life.
And, because of this fact, the power of organisation has come so easily
to your help when you needed it. For the rhythm of beauty is the inner
spirit, whose outer body is organisation.

All particular civilisation is the interpretation of particular human
experience. Europe seems to have felt emphatically the conflict of
things in the universe, which can only be brought under control by
conquest. Therefore she is ever ready for fight, and the best portion of
her attention is occupied in organising forces. But Japan has felt, in
her world, the touch of some presence, which has evoked in her soul a
feeling of reverent adoration. She does not boast of her mastery of
nature, but to her she brings, with infinite care and joy, her offerings
of love. Her relationship with the world is the deeper relationship of
heart. This spiritual bond of love she has established with the hills of
her country, with the sea and the streams, with the forests in all their
flowery moods and varied physiognomy of branches; she has taken into her
heart all the rustling whispers and sighing of the woodlands and sobbing
of the waves; the sun and the moon she has studied in all the
modulations of their lights and shades, and she is glad to close her
shops to greet the seasons in her orchards and gardens and cornfields.
This opening of the heart to the soul of the world is not confined to a
section of your privileged classes, it is not the forced product of
exotic culture, but it belongs to all your men and women of all
conditions. This experience of your soul, in meeting a personality in
the heart of the world, has been embodied in your civilisation. It is
civilisation of human relationship. Your duty towards your state has
naturally assumed the character of filial duty, your nation becoming one
family with your Emperor as its head. Your national unity has not been
evolved from the comradeship of arms for defensive and offensive
purposes, or from partnership in raiding adventures, dividing among each
member the danger and spoils of robbery. It is not an outcome of the
necessity of organisation for some ulterior purpose, but it is an
extension of the family and the obligations of the heart in a wide field
of space and time. The ideal of "maitri" is at the bottom of your
culture,--"maitri" with men and "maitri" with Nature. And the true
expression of this love is in the language of beauty, which is so
abundantly universal in this land. This is the reason why a stranger,
like myself, instead of feeling envy or humiliation before these
manifestations of beauty, these creations of love, feels a readiness to
participate in the joy and glory of such revealment of the human heart.

And this has made me all the more apprehensive of the change, which
threatens Japanese civilisation, as something like a menace to one's own
person. For the huge heterogeneity of the modern age, whose only common
bond is usefulness, is nowhere so pitifully exposed against the dignity
and hidden power of reticent beauty, as in Japan.

But the danger lies in this, that organised ugliness storms the mind and
carries the day by its mass, by its aggressive persistence, by its power
of mockery directed against the deeper sentiments of heart. Its harsh
obtrusiveness makes it forcibly visible to us, overcoming our
senses,--and we bring to its altar sacrifices, as does a savage to the
fetish which appears powerful because of its hideousness. Therefore its
rivalry to things that are modest and profound and have the subtle
delicacy of life is to be dreaded.

I am quite sure that there are men in your nation, who are not in
sympathy with your national ideals; whose object is to gain, and not to
grow. They are loud in their boast, that they have modernised Japan.
While I agree with them so far as to say, that the spirit of the race
should harmonise with the spirit of the time, I must warn them that
modernising is a mere affectation of modernism, just as affectation of
poesy is poetising. It is nothing but mimicry, only affectation is
louder than the original, and it is too literal. One must bear in mind,
that those who have the true modern spirit need not modernise, just as
those who are truly brave are not braggarts. Modernism is not in the
dress of the Europeans; or in the hideous structures, where their
children are interned when they take their lessons; or in the square
houses with flat straight wall-surfaces, pierced with parallel lines of
windows, where these people are caged in their lifetime; certainly
modernism is not in their ladies' bonnets, carrying on them loads of
incongruities. These are not modern, but merely European. True
modernism is freedom of mind, not slavery of taste. It is independence
of thought and action, not tutelage under European schoolmasters. It is
science, but not its wrong application in life,--a mere imitation of our
science teachers who reduce it into a superstition absurdly invoking its
aid for all impossible purposes.

Science, when it oversteps its limits and occupies the whole region of
life, has its fascination. It looks so powerful because of its
superficiality,--as does a hippopotamus which is very little else but
physical. Science speaks of the struggle for existence, but forgets that
man's existence is not merely of the surface. Man truly exists in the
ideal of perfection, whose depth and height are not yet measured. Life
based upon science is attractive to some men, because it has all the
characteristics of sport; it feigns seriousness, but is not profound.
When you go a-hunting, the less pity you have the better; for your one
object is to chase the game and kill it, to feel that you are the
greater animal, that your method of destruction is thorough and
scientific. Because, therefore, a sportsman is only a superficial
man,--his fullness of humanity not being there to hamper him,--he is
successful in killing innocent life and is happy. And the life of
science is that superficial life. It pursues success with skill and
thoroughness, and takes no account of the higher nature of man. But even
science cannot tow humanity against truth and be successful; and those
whose minds are crude enough to plan their lives upon the supposition,
that man is merely a hunter and his paradise the paradise of sportsman,
will be rudely awakened in the midst of their trophies of skeletons and
skulls. For man's struggle for existence is to exist in the fullness of
his nature,--not by curtailing all that is best in him and dwarfing his
existence itself, but by accepting all the responsibilities of his
spiritual life, even through death and defeat.

I do not for a moment suggest, that Japan should be unmindful of
acquiring modern weapons of self-protection. But this should never be
allowed to go beyond her instinct of self-preservation. She must know
that the real power is not in the weapons themselves, but in the man
who wields those weapons; and when he, in his eagerness for power,
multiplies his weapons at the cost of his own soul, then it is he who is
in even greater danger than his enemies.

Things that are living are so easily hurt; therefore they require
protection. In nature, life protects itself within in coverings, which
are built with life's own material. Therefore they are in harmony with
life's growth, or else when the time comes they easily give way and are
forgotten. The living man has his true protection in his spiritual
ideals, which have their vital connection with his life and grow with
his growth. But, unfortunately, all his armour is not living,--some of
it is made of steel, inert and mechanical. Therefore, while making use
of it, man has to be careful to protect himself from its tyranny. If he
is weak enough to grow smaller to fit himself to his covering, then it
becomes a process of gradual suicide by shrinkage of the soul. And Japan
must have a firm faith in the moral law of existence to be able to
assert to herself, that the Western nations are following that path of
suicide, where they are smothering their humanity under the immense
weight of organisations in order to keep themselves in power and hold
others in subjection.

Therefore I cannot think that the imitation of the outward aspects of
the West, which is becoming more and more evident in modern Japan, is
essential to her strength or stability. It is burdening her true nature
and causing weakness, which will be felt more deeply as time goes on.
The habits, which are being formed by the modern Japanese from their
boyhood,--the habits of the Western life, the habits of the alien
culture,--will prove, one day, a serious obstacle to the understanding
of their own true nature. And then, if the children of Japan forget
their past, if they stand as barriers, choking the stream that flows
from the mountain peak of their ancient history, their future will be
deprived of the water of life that has made her culture so fertile with
richness of beauty and strength.

What is still more dangerous for Japan is, not this imitation of the
outer features of the West, but the acceptance of the motive force of
the Western civilisation as her own. Her social ideals are already
showing signs of defeat at the hands of politics, and her modern
tendency seems to incline towards political gambling in which the
players stake their souls to win their game. I can see her motto, taken
from science, "Survival of the Fittest," writ large at the entrance of
her present-day history--the motto whose meaning is, "Help yourself, and
never heed what it costs to others"; the motto of the blind man, who
only believes in what he can touch, because he cannot see. But those who
can see, know that men are so closely knit, that when you strike others
the blow comes back to yourself. The moral law, which is the greatest
discovery of man, is the discovery of this wonderful truth, that man
becomes all the truer, the more he realises himself in others. This
truth has not only a subjective value, but is manifested in every
department of our life. And nations, who sedulously cultivate moral
blindness as the cult of patriotism, will end their existence in a
sudden and violent death. In past ages we had foreign invasions, there
had been cruelty and bloodshed, intrigues of jealousy and avarice, but
they never touched the soul of the people deeply; for the people, as a
body, never participated in these games. They were merely the outcome of
individual ambitions. The people themselves, being free from the
responsibilities of the baser and more heinous side of those adventures,
had all the advantage of the heroic and the human disciplines derived
from them. This developed their unflinching loyalty, their single-minded
devotion to the obligations of honour, their power of complete
self-surrender and fearless acceptance of death and danger. Therefore
the ideals, whose seats were in the hearts of the people, would not
undergo any serious change owing to the policies adopted by the kings or
generals. But now, where the spirit of the Western civilisation
prevails, the whole people is being taught from boyhood, to foster
hatreds and ambitions by all kinds of means,--by the manufacture of
half-truths and untruths in history, by persistent misrepresentation
of other races and the culture of unfavourable sentiments towards them,
by setting up memorials of events, very often false, which for the sake
of humanity should be speedily forgotten, thus continually brewing evil
menace towards neighbours and nations other than their own. This is
poisoning the very fountain-head of humanity. It is discrediting the
ideals, which were born of the lives of men, who were our greatest and
best. It is holding up gigantic selfishness as the one universal
religion for all nations of the world. We can take anything else from
the hands of science, but not this elixir of moral death. Never think
for a moment, that the hurts you inflict upon other races will not
infect you, and the enmities you sow around your homes will be a wall of
protection to you for all time to come. To imbue the minds of a whole
people with an abnormal vanity of its own superiority, to teach it to
take pride in its moral callousness and ill-begotten wealth, to
perpetuate humiliation of defeated nations by exhibiting trophies won
from war, and using these in schools in order to breed in children's
minds contempt for others, is imitating the West where she has a
festering sore, whose swelling is a swelling of disease eating into its
vitality.

Our food crops, which are necessary for our sustenance, are products of
centuries of selection and care. But the vegetation, which we have not
to transform into our lives, does not require the patient thoughts of
generations. It is not easy to get rid of weeds; but it is easy, by
process of neglect, to ruin your food crops and let them revert to their
primitive state of wildness. Likewise the culture, which has so kindly
adapted itself to your soil,--so intimate with life, so human,--not only
needed tilling and weeding in past ages, but still needs anxious work
and watching. What is merely modern,--as science and methods of
organisation,--can be transplanted; but what is vitally human has fibres
so delicate, and roots so numerous and far reaching, that it dies when
moved from its soil. Therefore I am afraid of the rude pressure of the
political ideals of the West upon your own. In political civilisation,
the state is an abstraction and relationship of men utilitarian. Because
it has no roots in sentiments, it is so dangerously easy to handle. Half
a century has been enough for you to master this machine; and there are
men among you, whose fondness for it exceeds their love for the living
ideals which were born with the birth of your nation and nursed in your
centuries. It is like a child, who, in the excitement of his play,
imagines he likes his playthings better than his mother.

Where man is at his greatest, he is unconscious. Your civilisation,
whose mainspring is the bond of human relationship, has been nourished
in the depth of a healthy life beyond reach of prying self-analysis. But
a mere political relationship is all conscious; it is an eruptive
inflammation of aggressiveness. It has forcibly burst upon your notice.
And the time has come, when you have to be roused into full
consciousness of the truth by which you live, so that you may not be
taken unawares. The past has been God's gift to you; about the present,
you must make your own choice.

So the questions you have to put to yourselves are these,--"Have we read
the world wrong, and based our relation to it upon an ignorance of human
nature? Is the instinct of the West right, where she builds her national
welfare behind the barricade of a universal distrust of humanity?"

You must have detected a strong accent of fear, whenever the West has
discussed the possibility of the rise of an Eastern race. The reason of
it is this, that the power, by whose help she thrives, is an evil power;
so long as it is held on her own side she can be safe, while the rest of
the world trembles. The vital ambition of the present civilisation of
Europe is to have the exclusive possession of the devil. All her
armaments and diplomacy are directed upon this one object. But these
costly rituals for invocation of the evil spirit lead through a path of
prosperity to the brink of cataclysm. The furies of terror, which the
West has let loose upon God's world, come back to threaten herself and
goad her into preparations of more and more frightfulness; this gives
her no rest and makes her forget all else but the perils that she
causes to others, and incurs herself. To the worship of this devil of
politics she sacrifices other countries as victims. She feeds upon their
dead flesh and grows fat upon it, so long as the carcasses remain
fresh,--but they are sure to rot at last, and the dead will take their
revenge, by spreading pollution far and wide and poisoning the vitality
of the feeder. Japan had all her wealth of humanity, her harmony of
heroism and beauty, her depth of self-control and richness of
self-expression; yet the Western nations felt no respect for her, till
she proved that the bloodhounds of Satan are not only bred in the
kennels of Europe, but can also be domesticated in Japan and fed with
man's miseries. They admit Japan's equality with themselves, only when
they know that Japan also possesses the key to open the floodgate of
hell-fire upon the fair earth, whenever she chooses, and can dance, in
their own measure, the devil dance of pillage, murder, and ravishment of
innocent women, while the world goes to ruin. We know that, in the early
stage of man's moral immaturity, he only feels reverence for the god
whose malevolence he dreads. But is this the ideal of man which we can
look up to with pride? After centuries of civilisation nations fearing
each other like the prowling wild beasts of the night time; shutting
their doors of hospitality; combining only for purpose of aggression or
defence; hiding in their holes their trade secrets, state secrets,
secrets of their armaments; making peace offerings to the barking dogs
of each other with the meat which does not belong to them; holding down
fallen races struggling to stand upon their feet; counting their safety
only upon the feebleness of the rest of humanity; with their right hands
dispensing religion to weaker peoples, while robbing them with their
left,--is there anything in this to make us envious? Are we to bend our
knees to the spirit of this civilisation, which is sowing broadcast over
all the world seeds of fear, greed, suspicion, unashamed lies of its
diplomacy, and unctuous lies of its profession of peace and good-will
and universal brotherhood of Man? Can we have no doubt in our minds,
when we rush to the Western market to buy this foreign product in
exchange for our own inheritance? I am aware how difficult it is to know
one's self; and the man, who is intoxicated, furiously denies his
drunkenness; yet the West herself is anxiously thinking of her problems
and trying experiments. But she is like a glutton, who has not the heart
to give up his intemperance in eating, and fondly clings to the hope
that he can cure his nightmares of indigestion by medicine. Europe is
not ready to give up her political inhumanity, with all the baser
passions of man attendant upon it; she believes only in modification of
systems, and not in change of heart.

We are willing to buy their machine-made systems, not with our hearts,
but with our brains. We shall try them and build sheds for them, but not
enshrine them in our homes, or temples. There are races, who worship the
animals they kill; we can buy meat from them, when we are hungry, but
not the worship which goes with the killing. We must not vitiate our
children's minds with the superstition, that business is business, war
is war, politics is politics. We must know that man's business has to be
more than mere business, and so have to be his war and politics. You had
your own industry in Japan; how scrupulously honest and true it was, you
can see by its products,--by their grace and strength, their
conscientiousness in details, where they can hardly be observed. But the
tidal wave of falsehood has swept over your land from that part of the
world, where business is business, and honesty is followed in it merely
as the best policy. Have you never felt shame, when you see the trade
advertisements, not only plastering the whole town with lies and
exaggerations, but invading the green fields, where the peasants do
their honest labour, and the hill-tops, which greet the first pure light
of the morning? It is so easy to dull our sense of honour and delicacy
of mind with constant abrasion, while falsehoods stalk abroad with proud
steps in the name of trade, politics and patriotism, that any protest
against their perpetual intrusion into our lives is considered to be
sentimentalism, unworthy of true manliness.

And it has come to pass, that the children of those heroes, who would
keep their word at the point of death, who would disdain to cheat men
for vulgar profit, who even in their fight would much rather court
defeat than be dishonourable, have become energetic in dealing with
falsehoods and do not feel humiliated by gaining advantage from them.
And this has been effected by the charm of the word 'modern.' But if
undiluted utility be modern, beauty is of all ages; if mean selfishness
be modern, the human ideals are no new inventions. And we must know for
certain, that however modern may be the proficiency, which clips and
cripples man for the sake of methods and machines, it will never live to
be old.

When Japan is in imminent peril of neglecting to realise where she is
great, it is the duty of a foreigner like myself to remind her, that she
has given rise to a civilisation which is perfect in its form, and has
evolved a sense of sight which clearly sees truth in beauty and beauty
in truth. She has achieved something, which is positive and complete.
It is easier for a stranger to know what it is in her, which is truly
valuable for all mankind,--what is there, which only she, of all other
races, has produced from her inner life and not from her mere power of
adaptability. Japan must be reminded, that it is her sense of the rhythm
of life and of all things, her genius for simplicity, her love for
cleanliness, her definiteness of thought and action, her cheerful
fortitude, her immense reserve of force in self-control, her
sensitiveness to her code of honour and defiance of death, which have
given her the power to resist the cyclonic storm of exploitation that
has sprung from the shores of Europe circling round and round the world.
All these qualities are the outcome of a civilisation, whose foundation
is in the spiritual ideals of life. Such a civilisation has the gift of
immortality; for it does not offend against the laws of creation and is
not assailed by all the forces of nature. I feel it is an impiety to be
indifferent to its protection from the incursion of vulgarity of power.

But while trying to free our minds from the arrogant claims of Europe
and to help ourselves out of the quicksands of our infatuation, we may
go to the other extreme and blind ourselves with a wholesale suspicion
of the West. The reaction of disillusionment is just as unreal as the
first shock of illusion. We must try to come to that normal state of
mind, by which we can clearly discern our own danger and avoid it,
without being unjust towards the source of that danger. There is always
the natural temptation in us of wishing to pay back Europe in her own
coin, and return contempt for contempt and evil for evil. But that again
would be to imitate Europe in one of her worst features which comes out
in her behaviour to people whom she describes as yellow or red, brown or
black. And this is a point on which we in the East have to acknowledge
our guilt and own that our sin has been as great, if not greater, when
we insulted humanity by treating with utter disdain and cruelty men who
belonged to a particular creed, colour or caste. It is really because we
are afraid of our own weakness, which allows itself to be overcome by
the sight of power, that we try to substitute for it another weakness
which makes itself blind to the glories of the West. When we truly know
the Europe which is great and good, we can effectively save ourselves
from the Europe which is mean and grasping. It is easy to be unfair in
one's judgment when one is faced with human miseries,--and pessimism is
the result of building theories while the mind is suffering. To despair
of humanity is only possible, if we lose faith in the power which brings
to it strength, when its defeat is greatest, and calls out new life from
the depth of its destruction. We must admit that there is a living soul
in the West which is struggling unobserved against the hugeness of the
organisations under which men, women and children are being crushed, and
whose mechanical necessities are ignoring laws that are spiritual and
human,--the soul whose sensibilities refuse to be dulled completely by
dangerous habits of heedlessness in dealings with races for whom it
lacks natural sympathy. The West could never have risen to the eminence
she has reached, if her strength were merely the strength of the
brute, or of the machine. The divine in her heart is suffering from the
injuries inflicted by her hands upon the world,--and from this pain of
her higher nature flows the secret balm which will bring healing to
those injuries. Time after time she has fought against herself and has
undone the chains, which with her own hands she had fastened round
helpless limbs; and though she forced poison down the throat of a great
nation at the point of sword for gain of money, she herself woke up to
withdraw from it, to wash her hands clean again. This shows hidden
springs of humanity in spots which look dead and barren. It proves that
the deeper truth in her nature, which can survive such career of cruel
cowardliness, is not greed, but reverence for unselfish ideals. It would
be altogether unjust, both to us and to Europe, to say that she has
fascinated the modern Eastern mind by the mere exhibition of her power.
Through the smoke of cannons and dust of markets the light of her moral
nature has shone bright, and she has brought to us the ideal of
ethical freedom, whose foundation lies deeper than social conventions
and whose province of activity is world-wide.

The East has instinctively felt, even through her aversion, that she has
a great deal to learn from Europe, not merely about the materials of
power, but about its inner source, which is of mind and of the moral
nature of man. Europe has been teaching us the higher obligations of
public good above those of the family and the clan, and the sacredness
of law, which makes society independent of individual caprice, secures
for it continuity of progress, and guarantees justice to all men of all
positions in life. Above all things Europe has held high before our
minds the banner of liberty, through centuries of martyrdom and
achievement,--liberty of conscience, liberty of thought and action,
liberty in the ideals of art and literature. And because Europe has won
our deep respect, she has become so dangerous for us where she is
turbulently weak and false,--dangerous like poison when it is served
along with our best food. There is one safety for us upon which we
hope we may count, and that is, that we can claim Europe herself, as our
ally, in our resistance to her temptations and to her violent
encroachments; for she has ever carried her own standard of perfection,
by which we can measure her falls and gauge her degrees of failure, by
which we can call her before her own tribunal and put her to shame,--the
shame which is the sign of the true pride of nobleness.

But our fear is, that the poison may be more powerful than the food, and
what is strength in her to-day may not be the sign of health, but the
contrary; for it may be temporarily caused by the upsetting of the
balance of life. Our fear is that evil has a fateful fascination, when
it assumes dimensions which are colossal,--and though at last, it is
sure to lose its centre of gravity, by its abnormal disproportion, the
mischief which it creates before its fall may be beyond reparation.

Therefore I ask you to have the strength of faith and clarity of mind to
know for certain, that the lumbering structure of modern progress,
riveted by the iron bolts of efficiency, which runs upon the wheels of
ambition, cannot hold together for long. Collisions are certain to
occur; for it has to travel upon organised lines, it is too heavy to
choose its own course freely; and once it is off the rails, its endless
train of vehicles is dislocated. A day will come, when it will fall in a
heap of ruin and cause serious obstruction to the traffic of the world.
Do we not see signs of this even now? Does not the voice come to us,
through the din of war, the shrieks of hatred, the wailings of despair,
through the churning up of the unspeakable filth which has been
accumulating for ages in the bottom of this civilisation,--the voice
which cries to our soul, that the tower of national selfishness, which
goes by the name of patriotism, which has raised its banner of treason
against heaven, must totter and fall with a crash, weighed down by its
own bulk, its flag kissing the dust, its light extinguished? My
brothers, when the red light of conflagration sends up its crackle of
laughter to the stars, keep your faith upon those stars and not upon the
fire of destruction. For when this conflagration consumes itself and
dies down, leaving its memorial in ashes, the eternal light will again
shine in the East,--the East which has been the birth-place of the
morning sun of man's history. And who knows if that day has not already
dawned, and the sun not risen, in the Easternmost horizon of Asia? And I
offer, as did my ancestor rishis, my salutation to that sunrise of the
East, which is destined once again to illumine the whole world.

I know my voice is too feeble to raise itself above the uproar of this
bustling time, and it is easy for any street urchin to fling against me
the epithet of 'unpractical.' It will stick to my coat-tail, never to be
washed away, effectively excluding me from the consideration of all
respectable persons. I know what a risk one runs from the vigorously
athletic crowds to be styled an idealist in these days, when thrones
have lost their dignity and prophets have become an anachronism, when
the sound that drowns all voices is the noise of the market-place. Yet
when, one day, standing on the outskirts of Yokohama town, bristling
with its display of modern miscellanies, I watched the sunset in your
southern sea, and saw its peace and majesty among your pine-clad
hills,--with the great Fujiyama growing faint against the golden
horizon, like a god overcome with his own radiance,--the music of
eternity welled up through the evening silence, and I felt that the sky
and the earth and the lyrics of the dawn and the dayfall are with the
poets and idealists, and not with the marketsmen robustly contemptuous
of all sentiments,--that, after the forgetfulness of his own divinity,
man will remember again that heaven is always in touch with his world,
which can never be abandoned for good to the hounding wolves of the
modern era, scenting human blood and howling to the skies.




                           Transcriber Notes:

On page 11, "sacrificesstet" was replaced with "sacrifices".

On page 20, "imitaing" was replaced with "imitating", and "its
vitality," was replaced with "its vitality.".





End of Project Gutenberg's The Spirit of Japan, by Sir Rabindranath Tagore



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPIRIT OF JAPAN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


